The Simpsons Hit &amp; Run

The Simpsons Hit & Run is an action-adventure video game based on the animated sitcom (comedy TV show) "The Simpsons". It was released for the Nintendo GameCube, Xbox, PlayStation 2, and Windows in the United States on September 16, 2003 and in Europe on October 31, 2003. The game was developed or made by Radical Entertainment and published or was put out to be sold by Vivendi Universal. To make the game harder and more fun, the story and dialogue were written by the writers of the TV show. The voices were supplied by the cast of "The Simpsons".

The game follows the Simpson family and the people who live in Springfield, who see many strange things that happen in their town. When the Simpsons themselves decide to find out what is going on, they find out that aliens Kang and Kodos are filming a reality television series about the city. To make the show more interesting, the aliens release Buzz Cola, a soda that makes people go crazy, into Springfield's water supply. With help from Professor Frink, Homer is able to destroy the aliens' spaceship, and Springfield and its people are returned to normal.

The game received mostly positive, or good reviews from video game critics. Praise was given mostly on how much the game is was like the show and its funny take on the "Grand Theft Auto III" video game. The game received the award for Fave Video Game at the 2004 Nickelodeon Australian Kids' Choice Awards. More than three million copies of the game were sold as of June 2007.

"Hit & Run" has seven levels, each with missions and a unique plot. The player can only move, or control one certain character in each level. he game's playable characters are Homer Simpson, Bart Simpson, Lisa Simpson, Marge Simpson, and Apu Nahasapeemapetilon. When walking, the playing character can walk, run, and perform many attacks: a normal kick, a jumping kick, and a smashing move. To drive, the player can either drive one of the many vehicles that are on the road, a feature taken from "Grand Theft Auto 3", or use a phone booth to choose a car. The game's driving missions are also similar to those of "Grand Theft Auto 3". In both games, the player races against other characters, gets items before a timer runs out, and wrecks other cars.



