Will Mellor

William "Will" Mellor (born 3 April 1976 in Bredbury, Stockport, Greater Manchester) is an English actor and former pop star. 

Mellor lived as a child in the Bredbury area of Stockport going to Bredbury Green Primary School and later going to Werneth School, Greater Manchester, and was the youngest of the family with four older sisters: Janice, Cheryl, Joanne and Sarah, Joanne is disabled - Mellor acted in a 2006 blood donation advert, where he tells about his sister's heart surgery.

Mellor first started acting in 1990, when he acted as Ben Rowlingson in the children's programme "Children's Ward". In 1993 tried to play football with Vauxhall Motors FC, and was about to sign a deal with them until he argued with manager Alex Tannin over bootlaces. This helped his decision to become an actor.

In 1995, Mellor starting acting in the soap opera, "Hollyoaks" in which he played (acted as) James 'Jambo' Bolton. He left the show in 1998. Soon after, he made a cover of Leo Sayer's "When I Need You" as a single, which went to number 5 in the British charts, as well as another song called "No Matter What I Do", which reached number 23. 

He was also in the music video for Boyzone's Comic Relief single "When The Going Gets Tough".

Shortly after, he returned to acting, playing Greg, in "Is Harry on the Boat?". He also played Jack Vincent in "Casualty" between 2001 and 2003 and has starred (played one of the main actors) as Gaz Wilkinson in the TV comedy "Two Pints of Lager and a Packet of Crisps" since 2001. He also had a small role in a Christmas version of "Hollyoaks", in which he played the ghost of Jambo (even though Jambo is not dead). Will also stars as "Barmpot" in postal worker drama "Sorted" and has also played DC Jed Griffiths in the second series of "Murder Investigation Team". In 2004 he was the voice for Georgie (the dog) in the CITV series "Barking".

Mellor won the first series of the BBC singing contest, "Comic Relief does Fame Academy" in 2003. Mellor made his first appearance on "EastEnders" on 20 May 2007 playing salesman Warren Stamp. Eastenders bosses were so happy they wanted Will to stay on for a longer time but he said no to the offer because he had other things to do that he had said yes to.

He was a guest star in the BBC fantasy drama, Merlin.

In October 2008, he starred in "The Prisoner", a documentary about prison life.

Mellor used to date former "Coronation Street" actress Angela Griffin. He met his wife, dancer Michelle McSween when they both starred in the stage musical "Oh, What a Night" in 1999. They have two children, Jayden Will born in 2004 in Hammersmith and Fulham, London, and a baby girl Renee born in June 2008. He supports Manchester United.



