List of Slipknot band members

Slipknot is a heavy metal band from Des Moines, Iowa. The band started in 1995 by vocalist and percussionist Anders Colsefini, guitarists Donnie Steele and Josh "Gnar" Brainard, bassist Paul Gray, drummer Joey Jordison,and percussionist Shawn Crahan. Before the band released its first album in 1999, Slipknot has gone through many line-up changes. After their first album, the line-up has stayed the same. The band is known for having a lot of members. The current members include a lead singer, two guitarists, a bassist, a drummer, two percussionists, a sampler, and a turntablist.

In 1996, when the band finished recording their demo album "Mate. Feed. Kill. Repeat.", Slipknot saw its first line-up change when guitarist Donnie Steele left the band and was replaced by Craig Jones. Shortly after, drummer Jordison said they needed a full-time sampler and Jones took the position as "he liked doing that anyway." Mick Thomson then joined the band to be the new guitarist. After "Mate. Feed. Kill. Repeat." was released, the band were working on new songs which needed more singing melody and the then-lead singer Colsefini had a hard time with this. In 1997, Corey Taylor was asked to join the band and after practicing with Slipknot "everything just clicked." Because of that, Colsefini was moved to backing vocals and percussion. However Colsefini was unhappy with his new role and left the band a month later.

Since the band wanted to keep their percussive sound, Greg Welts joined the band to replace Colsefini. Towards the end of 1997, each band member picked an a number to identify themselves. In 1998, Welts became the only member to be kicked out of the band and he was replaced by Chris Fehn. Slipknot wanted to have a DJ in the band, but had a hard time finding one because "the people [they] knew who were DJs all sucked!" Sid Wilson approached the band after seeing them live. He proceeded to impress the band with his ability and his antics; Wilson was considered "Slipknot material" and his hiring brought the band's line-up to nine members. The final change in the band's line-up came at the latter stages of the recording process of the band's debut album, "Slipknot", in 1999. While the band took a break from recording the album, Brainard decided to leave the band and was replaced by Jim Root.

Jay Weinberg
active 2013 present 
plays drums
performed in .5 the Gray chapter
Jay joined the band in 2013 after original drummer Joey jordison was fired from the band.

Paul Gray
Died in 2010 after an overdose.
years active 1995-2010
Joey jordison
played drums 
years active 1995-2013

Joey was kicked from the band in 2013 and was replaced by Jay Weinberg




