Globi

Globi is a Swiss cartoon character. He is often called the Swiss Mickey Mouse. Globi is one of the most famous cartoon figures in the Swiss-German part of Switzerland. It was created in 1932 by the Globus department store chain for advertising. It is a blue human-like parrot with a black beret and trousers in black and red. It was so much liked by the children in Switzerland that it got published independently in 1944. There are a many Globi cartoon books and tapes in Switzerland today. Its appearance has changed several times since his development.

Globi was created in 1932 by the Globus stores as a media vehicle for children. They wanted to address Globi to children. First, the figure was named "Kimbukku". Because the people of the canton of Bale named the Globus warehouse "Globi", they thought would be a better name than Kimbukku. The figure was well liked by the young customers from the beginning. First "Globi" appeared as a comic strip in the magazine "der Globi". In 1935, the first book "Globi the Childfriend" appeared. This book has sold over a million copies. It was only really successful in Switzerland. Until today, 79 illustrated classic books have been published. The Globi books were always successful, but in the 1970s they were criticized because of the racism, sexism and violence in books of the 1940s and 1950s. Today, Globi is seen as politically correct. It started to be interested in ecology and animal protection and became more of a role model. For example, in a newer volume, Globi goes with the small rhino named Najma to Africa. The readers learn about the problems of life in the savanna of Africa for rhinos. There was also a movie with Globi in the cinemas in 2005.

Because of the big success of Globi, the costs for the warehouse became too big. Because of this, Globi Publisher AG was founded in 1944. Since 1 January 2007, the Globi Publisher AG has been owned by Orell Füssli Publisher. The publisher is active in the Swiss market. In addition to books, they sell other Globi merchandise. These include dishes, cutlery, watches and alarm clocks, plush toys, drapery, lamps, card games and foods. There are also tourist attractions such as Globi hotel, a trail and a bus. In December 2008, a Globi winter park was built in Engelberg. In addition to Globi, other characters including Papa-Moll and Glöbeli exist. Yearly, over 80,000 Globi comic books, 40,000 educational Globi books, between 25,000 and 30,000 Papa-Moll books and 100,000 cassettes are sold.

Today Globi Publisher employs 4 permanent employee, 2 exponents, 3-4 graphic artists and bookkeepers and about 10-12 illustrators and writers.



