Brentwood College School

Brentwood College School is a boarding school for boys and girls that helps students get ready for university. This school is in a small town called Mill Bay on Vancouver Island in British Columbia, Canada. The school has modern classrooms, a theatre, and science labs. The school is next to the ocean. Students study the ocean and can go sailing, rowing, canoeing, and kayaking.

Brentwood College School was started in 1923 in Brentwood Bay. The old school was destroyed by a fire in 1947. The school was then moved to Mill Bay and opened again in 1961. In 1972, girls started going to the school.

Brentwood has tennis courts, rugby fields, student houses, and classrooms. There is a special building for rowing boats, a gymnasium, a medical building, and other buildings. In 1995, the theatre (T. Gill Bunch Centre) was built. This is a 20,000 square Foot (unit of length) theatre with 431 seats for the audience. Students act, play music, and dance in the theatre.

The theatre uses a heating system that doesn't harm the environment. The school will have another sustainable development building with classrooms, a big dining room and clothes laundry in February 2010.

Brentwood offers lessons that help students get ready for university. These lessons are for students who are in grades 9, 10, 11 or 12. Brentwood is a very good school in British Columbia. All the students go to university when they leave Brentwood.

These are the subjects students can study


These are the sports students can play


These are the art classes students can take


These are the clubs that students can belong to:

Some of the students receive money to help them study at the school.

The students have won a lot of awards for sports.


Brentwood College has a very good rowing program. Some of the students have rowed in national (Canadian) races and at the Olympic Games. Many of the students who row go to American universities.

Every year Brentwood has a rowing regatta. The regatta is in April for three days. This regatta is the biggest high school rowing regatta in North America, with 1500 students rowing and 3000 people watching.



