San Pedro de Macorís Province

San Pedro de Macorís is a province of the Dominican Republic. It is in the southeastern part of the country. Its capital city is San Pedro de Macorís.

The province has the same name of the capital of the province. In English, San Pedro is "Saint Peter"; "Macorís" was the name of a group of native people that lived in the Hispaniola. That name "Macorís", or "Macorix", was given to the river where the city of San Pedro de Macorís was founded..

San Pedro de Macorís was created as a Maritime District (a special administrative category that has been abandoned) on 13 June 1882. The 1907 Dominican Constitution change its status to province. It was part of the old province of Santo Domingo and of the El Seibo province before being elevated to the category of province with the municipalities of Macorís (later, San Pedro de Macorís), Ramón Santana and San José de Los Llanos.

Consuelo was made a municipality in 1996, Quisqueya in 1998 and Guayacanes in 1992. In 2000, El Puerto became a municipal district and Gautier in 2002.

The San Pedro de Macorís province is bordered to the north by the Hato Mayor and El Seibo provinces, to the east by the La Romana province and to the west by the Monte Plata and Santo Domingo provinces.The Caribbean Sea is to the south of the province.

In (last national census), there were people living in the San Pedro de Macorís province, and 244,215 () living in towns and cities. The population density was persons/km².

Its population represents of the total population of the country and the province is ranked as the 7th (out of 31 plus the National District) more populated province.

, the total estimated propulation of the province is 299,933 inhabitants.

The largest city of the province is San Pedro de Macorís, its head municipality or capital, with an urban population (in ) of 185,255 inhabitants.

The San Pedro de Macorís province has a total area of . It has of the area of the Dominican Republic and it is ranked as the 18th (out of 31 plus the National District) largest province.

The altitude of the provincial capital, San Pedro de Macorís, is above sea level.

The San Pedro de Macorís province is in the "Llano Costero del Caribe" ("Caribbean Coastal Plain"), a large plain in southeastern Dominican Republic where there are many savannas with grasses. There are not high mountains in the province, only some low hills.

The rivers in this province are not very long but they have much water; their sources are in the mountains north of the province and flow south to the Caribbean Sea. The most important rivers are, from east to west:

The climate of the province is a tropical climate, hot most of the year.

There are 6 municipalities and 2 municipal districts (M.D.) in the province.

Because in the province there are many savannas with grasses, the main economic activity for centuries was cattle raising. It is still an important activity in the province.

In the last years of the 19th century, during the war of independence in Cuba, many Cuban and American companies came to the Dominican Republic to grow sugar cane and to produce sugar. San Pedro de Macorís is the Dominican province where there are more sugar cane factories and the port of San Pedro de Macorís became one of the most important port in the country.

In the city of San Pedro de Macorís, manufacturing is important, mainly cement, rum and in industries in the "Zona Franca" ("free zone" where the industries do not pay taxes and all the production is sent to other countries).

In the Guayacanes municipality, tourism is important and there are many hotels close to the beaches, mainly in the Juan Dolio beach.


