Interpol (band)

Interpol is an alternative rock band from New York City. Popular songs include Evil, PDA and NYC. The band's current members are Paul Banks, Daniel Kessler, and Sam Fogarino. Bassist Carlos Dengler departed the band in 2010.

Paul Banks is the artist name used by the lead vocalist and one of the guitarists in the band Interpol. He is American but was born in Clacton-on-Sea, Essex, England. The family moved back to the USA, where his parents were from, when he was five. The family lived in Chicago, Illinois and Virginia Beach, Virginia. They also spent time in Europe and Tampico, Tamaulipas, Mexico before he attended college. 

He uses an alias in Interpol and in his solo work to separate life from work. In addition to Interpol, he has released one album, "Julian Plenti Is... Skyscraper" in 2009 and one EP, "Julian Plenti Lives..." in 2012, using the name "Julian Plenti". He also released one album, "Banks," in 2012, as "Paul Banks". A mixtape entitled "Everybody on My Dick Like They Supposed to Be" was made available to download on Datpiff in 2012. The tape has contributions from El-P, High Prizm, Talib Kweli and Mike G. 

Daniel Kessler - lead guitar.

Sam Fogarino - drums.

Interpol formed in the 1997 at NYU and signed to Matador Records in 2002. Their first album, "Turn On The Bright Lights" was released on August 20, 2002, through Matador Records. Well known singles and music videos from this album this include "Obstacle 1", "PDA" and "NYC". 

The band's second album, "Antics" was released September 28, 2004, also through Matador Records. Well known singles and music videos from this album include "Slow Hands", "Evil" and "C'mere". The "Evil" music video, directed by Charlie White is perhaps Interpol's best known. It shows a lifelike puppet surviving a car wreck. The meaning behind the song is much discussed, though Interpol have denied that it is about serial killers.

The band's third album, "Our Love To Admire" was released July 10, 2007 through Capitol Records. Well known singles and videos from this album include "The Heinrich Maneuver", "No I Threesome" and "Rest My Chemistry".

In July 2010, Interpol announced the departure of bassist Carlos Dengler. The fourth album, "Interpol", was released on September 7, 2010. Well known singles and videos from this album include "Barricade" and "Lights". The video for "Lights" was again directed by Charlie White.

The fifth album and most recent album, "El Pintor", was released on September 8, 2014. Well known singles and videos from this album include "All The Rage Back Home", "My Desire" and "Everything Is Wrong". 




