Crash Bandicoot 2: Cortex Strikes Back

Crash Bandicoot 2: Cortex Strikes Back is the second video game in the "Crash Bandicoot" series. It was published by Sony Computer Entertainment, produced by Universal Interactive Studios and developed by Naughty Dog for the PlayStation. It was first released for the PlayStation in 1997, and was re-released for the Sony Greatest Hits and Best for Family in 1998. In 1999, it was released again for the Platinum Range and for the PSOne Books in 2001. The game was later released on the European PlayStation Network on July 26, 2007. However, it was later taken off because "MediEvil" and "" did not do so well. The game was released on the North American PlayStation Network on January 10, 2008 and again on the European PlayStation Network on February 2, 2011.

The game takes place on a fictional group of islands near Australia. "Crash Bandicoot 2" follows the adventures of the hero bandicoot Crash. Crash is taken by series villain Doctor Neo Cortex. Cortex does this, because he now wants to "save the world". Crash has to compete in several levels of N. Sanity Island in order to gather Crystals. Crash must gather Crystals for Cortex to save the planet. Cortex wants to use the Crystals to give him enough power from an upcoming planetary alignment. Crash's sister CoCo joins Crash in several levels. She believes Cortex is still up to no good. She is also concerned about Doctor Nitrus Brio, who wants Crash to gather Gems instead of Crystals.

"Crash Bandicoot 2: Cortex Strikes Back" had positive reviews from critics. Many believed it to be better than the previous game. Others liked the graphics, control and music of the game. Some critics did not like the trail-and-error gameplay, not too many different levels, easy boss levels and the lack of innovation. The game became one of the best-selling PlayStation video games of all-time. In Japan, it sold more copies than the first "Crash Bandicoot" game, with 800,000 sold as of April 1998.



