Haute-Vienne

Haute-Vienne () is a department of France in the region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine. It is named after the Vienne river that flows through the department.

Haute-Vienne is one of the 83 French departments made during the French revolution, on 4 March 1790. It was created from parts of the old province of Limousin, its southern half, and of the county of Marche, its northern half, as well as some parts of Angoumois and Poitou.

The new department had six districts: Limoges, Le Dorat, Bellac, Saint-Junien, Saint-Yrieix and Saint-Léonard. The capital (now prefecture) was Limoges.

In 1800, with the creation of the "arrondissements" in France, the six districts were changed into four "arrondissements": Limoges, Bellac, Rochechouart and Saint-Yrieix.

On 10 September 1926, the "arrondissement" of Saint-Yrieix was eliminated.

Haute-Vienne is part of the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region. It has an area of .

The department is bordered by 6 departments of 2 regions: 

The department is in the nortwestern border of the Massif Central. Its altitude is high; the lowest point is in the valley of the Vienne river and the highest is in the mountains near the "Vassivière" lake. The highest point in the department is Puy de Crozat (), that is high.

The main rivers in the department are the Vienne, that gives its name to this the deparment and to Vienne, and the Gartempe, a tributary of the Creuse river.

The climate of Limoges is an oceanic climate with template summers, Cfb (Marine West Coast Climate) in the Köppen climate classification.

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Limoges is . The month with the most precipitation on average is October with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is February with an average of .

The average temperature for the year in Limoges is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The department is managed by the "Departamental Council of the Haute-Vienne" in Limoges. Haute-Vienne is part of the region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine.

There are 3 "arrondissements" (districts), 21 "cantons" and 200 "communes" (municipalities) in Haute-Vienne.

The following is a list of the 21 cantons of the Haute-Vienne department, in France, following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:

The inhabitants of Haute-Vienne are known, in French, as "Haut-Viennois" (women: "Haut-Viennoises").

Haute-Vienne has a population, in 2013, of 376,199, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Limoges, with 298,578 inhabitants, is by far the largest. The other two, Bellac and Rochechouart, have respectively 39,744 and 37,877 inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Haute-Vienne

The 10 most important cities in the department are:




