Ardennes (department)

Ardennes is a department in the Grand Est region of northeastern France named after the Ardennes forest. Its prefecture is the city of Charleville-Mézières.

Ardennes is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790 with Mézières as is capital. It was formed with the former province of Champagne, the principalities of Sedan and Argonne and other territories.

It was divided in six districts: Charleville, Grandpré, Rethel, Rocroi, Sedan and Vouziers.

In 1800, with the creation of the "arrondissements" in France, the six districts were changed into five "arrondissements": Mézières, Rethel, Rocroi, Sedan and Vouziers.

On 10 September 1926, the "arrondissements" of Rocroi and Sedan were eliminated but in 1942 Sedan was made again an "arrondissement".

The "communes" of Charleville and Mézières are joined to form the new "commune" of Charleville-Mézières; it was named the capital of the department.

Ardennes is part of the Grand Est region. It has an area of .

The department borders with Belgium (Namur and Luxembourg provinces) and 3 other departments in 2 regions:

The highest point of the department is "Croix-Scaille" () with an altitude of high.; it is found between the French "commune" of Hautes-Rivières and the Belgian "commune" of Gedinne.

The lowest point is on the Aisne river in Brienne-sur-Aisne, high.

Several rivers flow through the department; the main rivers are the Meuse, in the north, and the Aisne, in the south.

The Köppen climate classification type for the climate at Charleville-Mézières is an "Oceanic climate" (also known as Marine West Coast Climate) and of the subtype "Cfb".

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Charleville-Mézières is . The month with the most precipitation on average is November with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is June with an average of .

The average temperature for the year in Charleville-Mézières is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

Ardennes is managed by the "General Council of Ardennes" in Charleville-Mézières. The department is part of the Grand Est region.

There are 4 "arrondissements" (districts), 19 "cantons" and 457 "communes" (municipalities) in Ardennes.

The following is a list of the 19 cantons of the Ardennes department, following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:
The inhabitants of the Ardennes department are known, in French, as "Ardennais" (women: "Ardennaises"),

Ardennes had a population, in 2013, of 280,907, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Charleville-Mézières, with 161,902 inhabitants, is the "arrondissement" with more inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in the Ardennes

The main "communes" in the department are:




