Dildo, Newfoundland and Labrador

Dildo is a town on the southeastern Dildo Arm of Trinity Bay on the island of Newfoundland, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada. It is about 100 kilometres west-northwest of St. John's. South Dildo is a neighbouring unincorporated community.

Dildo's history goes back to 2000 BC, when Maritime Archaic aboriginal people lived at Anderson's Cove. By 700 AD, the Dorset culture was on Dildo island. In 1613, the Beothuks, who were living on Dildo Island at this time. Henry Crout met them, traded with them, and left gifts. In 1711, the people of Trinity Bay were ordered by Governor Crow to leave their homes during the winter, to defend themselves against the French who burned their houses. Dildo Island was one of the places designated for this purpose. The town of Dildo was created in the late 1700s and settled to use the marine resources such as fish (mostly cod), whales and seals.

The first church was built in 1878. It was a simple structure with no tower. It was wide by long. It could hold 250 people. It was heated by two coal stoves, one at each end, which shared a chimney. This church served the community until 1964 when the present (larger) building was constructed.

Dildo has a fast-growing tourist industry. It has picturesque scenery, several bed and breakfasts, places to eat, the Dildo Museum interpretive centre, the Historic Dildo Days celebration in August, boat tours, the Society of United Fishermen, the Lions centre, several heritage structures, walking trails, many businesses and road sign souvenirs.

Dildo has been in many media outlets. It was on the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation's "On the Road Again" and "Land and Sea". It was also on a live radio broadcast from the interpretation centre. In August 2006, Dildo was the subject of the "What the...?" segment on the Australian television talk show "Rove Live". The town is mentioned in the song "A Night in Dildo" by The Arrogant Worms.

South Dildo is an unincorporated community. In 2008, 205 people lived there. At the beginning of the 20th century, South Dildo had lumbering work. It supplied a schooner to the Labrador fishery. It had the roadside attraction of a wooden life-size humpback whale head. (The whale head was destroyed at the beginning of the 2006-2007 winter.)



