Necronomicon

The Necronomicon is a fictional book of magic created by the horror writer H. P. Lovecraft. It is a Greek-sounding word commonly translated as "book of dead names". It is pronounced "neck-ro-nom-ih-kon". Like most of his ideas, the "Necronomicon" came to Lovecraft in his dreams. Lovecraft let his friends write stories about the "Necronomicon". Eventually, fake "Necronomicon"s were written.

According to Lovecraft, the "Necronomicon" was written in the eighth century by a crazy Arabian man named Abdul Alhazred. Alhazred (who was also fictional) practiced evil magic. He assembled a collection of evil spells into a manuscript (a book with loose pages and no cover) which he called "Al Azif". Lovecraft said this as an Arabian phrase for a scary sound, like a scream. Later, the original manuscript was translated into Greek. It was given the title "Necronomicon". Olaus Wormius (a real person) then translated the Greek version into Latin. John Dee (also real) translated the "Necronomicon" into English. Lovecraft liked to mix in real people and places in his fiction. This made the stories seem more real. Some people were fooled into thinking what he wrote was true.

Since Lovecraft's death, several authors have written their own versions of the "Necronomicon". They are the author's imagination of what the "Necronomicon" would be like, if it were real. A few claim to be the actual "Necronomicon". The most famous case of a "real" "Necronomicon" is the "Simon" "Necronomicon". Simon is a fake name. It was published in the 1970s. The "Simon" "Necronomicon" is based on Sumerian mythology. It has nothing to do with H. P. Lovecraft's fiction. Some people dislike the "Simon" "Necronomicon". They do not like that it pretends to be real. Sometimes, people believe it to be real. Simon has written several books about the "Necronomicon"'s "discovery". 

Here are some hoax Necronomicons (books that the authors claim are the real Necronomicon):




Here are some books that are the authors' imaginations of what the Necronomicon might be like:




Here are all the books by Simon about the "Necronomicon":






