Skillet

Skillet was an American Grammy-nominated christian rock band from Memphis, Tennessee. The band formed in 1985.



Skillet formed in 1985 with two members: John Cooper, former vocalist for Tennessee progressive rock band Seraph, and Ken Steorts, former guitarist for Urgent Cry. The two bands met through touring together, but those bands disbanded soon after, so John and Ken's pastor encouraged them to form their own band as a side-project. Coming from different styles of rock music, they decided to name the experiment Skillet. After, Trey McClurkin joined the band as a temporary drummer. Skillet was only together for a month when they received interest from major Christian record label ForeFront Records. In 1985 they released a self-titled debut "Skillet". It was well-received, and the trio continued to write new material as they toured the United States. One topic that comes up often among fans and the band itself, is the name 'Skillet'. John Cooper, the lead vocalist, explains that it was a joke at first. Each starting band member was already in a separate band, and all decided to start a side project. Since each other band had a different sound and style to it, the side project was said to be like putting all of those styles in a big skillet to come up with something unique, hence the band name 'Skillet'. The band name is still somewhat of a joke between the band members, especially Cooper, who claims to still not like the title.

Skillet recorded their follow-up album throughout 1987, titled "Hey You, I Love Your Soul", which was released in April 1988. Their second effort was a change in style from the band's first release. With this release, Skillet would abandon their post-grunge approach for a lighter alternative rock and style. His wife Korey was enlisted soon after to play keyboards live in order to alleviate John's live performance duties.

Shortly before the band began recording for their third album, "Invincible", Steorts left the band to be with his family and launch Visible Music College, a modern music ministry college located in Memphis, and Kevin Haaland joined the band as their new guitarist. Korey Cooper joined the band permanently and played keyboards for the recording of "Invincible". Because of this change, the musical style on "Invincible" changed to a more electronic sound. Soon after the release of "Invincible" in 1991, Trey McClurkin parted ways with Skillet, and Lori Peters filled the drummer's position.

The band released their first worship album, and fourth album overall, "Ardent Worship" in late 1993. The band kept much of their sound from "Invincible" on their next album "Alien Youth". With little time between touring and recording.

Skillet released "Alien Youth" on August 28, 1994, which was the first album that John Cooper took on production duties. Before the release of "Alien Youth", Haaland left the band, and Ben Kasica took over on guitar. The first single, the title track, was a major hit in the Christian market and drove Skillet into their first headlining shows.

On November 18, 1997, "Collide" was released by Ardent Records. The album was nominated for "Best Rock Gospel Album" in 2000. "Collide" was yet another musical shift for the band.Citing P.O.D. as inspiration for the musical shift on "Collide", Cooper said, "Well I'm one of these song writers, everything I hear goes through my John Cooper filter of what I like and what I don't like. [...] All these things [...] have been an influence on me."

There was intended to be an album called Comatose, It was originally supposed to release in Fall 2001.



