WWE Breaking Point

Breaking Point was a professional wrestling pay-per-view (PPV) event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE), which took place on September 13, 2009 at the Bell Centre in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. It contained wrestlers from the Smackdown, ECW, and RAW brands. The name of the event was voted by fans via WWE's official website. Breaking Point was chosen over Submission Sunday, Total Submission, and Submit & Quit.
Breaking Point contained seven professional wrestling matches, with the three main event matches being held under submission rules. The event involved wrestlers from all three Brands, Raw, WWE SmackDown and ECW. The wrestlers portrayed either a good guy or a bad guy as they followed a series of events which led to a wrestling match or a series of wrestling matches.

On the August 24, 2009 edition of WWE Raw, the main event for the Raw brand was announced, it was to be a rematch from the previous nights SummerSlam PPV, Randy Orton would again defend the WWE Championship against John Cena. Due to the controversy surrounding the previous nights match, which involved the match being restarted due to a disqualification, count-out and Orton's use of illegal leverage.

Vince McMahon granted Cena a rematch as a result of Orton's actions, in a response to the interference from Brett DiBiase at SummerSlam, McMahon stated if anyone were to interfere on Orton's behalf he would lose the WWE Championship. The Championship was defended in an "I Quit" match, where the opponent is won by making the opponent say "I Quit".

After winning the World Heavyweight Championship at SummerSlam, it was announced CM Punk would defend the Championship the following week on the August 28, 2009 (taped August 25, 2009) edition against Jeff Hardy and the winner would face The Undertaker at Breaking Point in a Submission match, where the only way to win is by making your opponent Submit.

On the August 24, 2009 edition of WWE Raw, the Guest host for the night was weltherweight boxing champion Floyd Mayweather, Jr. who previously had a match with The Big Show at WrestleMania XXIV in 2008. Due to lingering bitterness from their WrestleMania match, Mayweather announced an exhibition match between Montel Vontavious Porter (MVP) and Mark Henry versus Unified Tag Team Champions Big Show and Chris Jericho, with an added stipulation that if MVP and Henry won they would face Show and Jericho for the Unified Tag Team Championship at Breaking Point. During the match MVP and Henry gained their chance when Mayweather handed MVP brass knuckles to knock Jericho out and pin Jericho for the win.

On the July 27, 2009 edition of Raw, to decide the opponent for the current WWE Champion Randy Orton at Night of Champions, a "beat the clock" challenge was set up, Triple H had to defeat his opponent Cody Rhodes in under a set time of 6 minutes and 49 seconds set by Mark Henry. Triple H was unsuccessful in his attempt, this match was followed by Rhodes with assistance from The Legacy team member Ted DiBiase beating down Triple H. This event led to Triple H seeking help from Shawn Michaels to reform the group, D-Generation X (DX), to face and beat Rhodes and DiBiase at SummerSlam. Following the weeks of SummerSlam DX was continuously beat down by The Legacy which resulted in an announcement on WWE.com that the two teams would face at Breaking Point, in a Submissions Count Anywhere match.




