Windows 7

Windows 7 is the third newest version of Microsoft Windows, which is an operating system for computers. Microsoft says Windows 7 is faster, more reliable and more compatible, and that it is a refinement of the previous version named Windows Vista.

The beta version of Windows 7 was released on January 9th, 2009, and the release candidate was released on May 5th. The final version of Windows 7 was sent to PC makers on July 22nd, 2009, so that they have three months to change it and include it with their computers. Windows 7 was released to the public on October 22nd, 2009.

First, a beta version of Windows codenamed "Blackcomb" was planned as the successor to Windows XP and Windows Server 2003. Big features were planned for Blackcomb, including an emphasis on looking for data and an advanced storage system named WinFS to enable such situations. However, an interim, minor release, codenamed "Longhorn" was announced for 2003, delaying the making of Blackcomb. By the middle of 2003, however, Longhorn had gotten some of the features meant for Blackcomb. After three major viruses exploited flaws in Windows operating systems within a short time period in 2003, Microsoft changed its development priorities, putting some of Longhorn's major development work on hold while they made new service packs for Windows XP and Windows Server 2003. Development of Longhorn (Windows Vista) was also "reset", or delayed in September 2004. A number of features were cut from Longhorn.

Blackcomb was renamed "Vienna" in early 2006, and again to "Windows 7" in 2007. In 2008, it was announced that "Windows 7" would also be the official name of the operating system.

The first known build was called Milestone 1. It was just a customized version of Windows Vista and it had a send feedback feature since it was a pre-release version.

The next build was called Milestone 2. It had a new taskbar and got Windows Live v 3.1.1.0.

The third Milestone was released in September 2008. It looked like Vista, but it had a new Action Center instead of the Security Center. The action center shows messages for many more stuff, not just security for Windows.

Build 6801 was a customized version of Milestone 3 that was shown at the Professional Developers Conference and was given to the people that were there.

Build 6933 was shown at PDC but was not given to the people attending. In December 2008, a leaked version of build 6956 was available for download on Peer To Peer networks.

On January 9th 2009, build 7000 was released as a public beta. According to the Engineering Windows 7 team, they had a lot of feedback from users.

The Release Candidate was made available on May 5th, 2009 and the build number is 7100.

Windows 7 was launched on October 22nd, 2009.

Windows 7 includes a number of new features, such as touching the screen, supporting virtual hard disks, being faster on multi-core processors and the taskbar is the biggest improvement. The taskbar allows users to pin most frequently used programs. Also, the glass user interface, Aero, has been improved.

Windows 7 has removed Inkball, Windows Ultimate Extras, the classic Start Menu, Windows Mail, Windows Movie Maker, Windows Photo Gallery and Windows Calendar. Windows Mail, Windows Movie Maker, and Windows Photo Gallery were replaced by Windows Live Essentials. The Windows Live Essentials are not included in Windows 7. They have to be downloaded.

There are six main editions of Windows 7.
The three main editions of Windows 7 are:

Three editions were not released worldwide. They are Starter, which you can only get already installed on a low-cost PC such as a Netbook, Home Basic, which was only released in poor countries, and Enterprise, which is only available to big companies.



