Homo erectus

Homo erectus (Latin: "upright man") is an extinct species of the genus "Homo". Fossil remains were found in Java (1890s) and in China (1921). Nearly all of them were lost during World War II, but there are casts that are considered to be reliable evidence.

Early in the 20th century it was believed that the first modern humans lived in Asia. But during the 1950s and 1970s, many fossil finds from East Africa (Kenya) showed that the oldest hominins came from there.

"H. erectus" had a cranial capacity (brain size) greater than that the earlier "Homo habilis". The earliest "H. erectus" remains have a cranial capacity of 850 cm³, while the latest Javan specimens measure up to 1100 cm³. This overlaps that of "H. sapiens": the frontal bone is less sloped and the dental arcade smaller than in australopithecines. The face is more vertical (less protrusive) than either the australopithecines or "H. habilis", with large brow-ridges and less prominent cheekbones. 

These early hominins stood about , Only 17 percent of modern male humans are taller. They were slender, with long arms and legs.

The sexual dimorphism between males and females was slightly greater than modern man, with males being about 25% larger than females. The discovery of the skeleton KNM-WT 15000, "Turkana boy" ("Homo ergaster"), made near Lake Turkana, Kenya by Richard Leakey and Kamoya Kimeu in 1984, is one of the most complete hominid-skeletons discovered, and has contributed greatly to the interpretation of human physiological evolution. 

The most distinctive tool of erectus was the Acheulean hand axe, first invented 1.8 million years ago (mya). This hand axe was made by chipping a suitable stone with a hammer stone. Later, the neanderthals used a soft hammer made of deer antler bone to make better tools. The Acheulean hand axe lasted for over a million years as the main tool. Its main use was for butchering meat. This we know because different uses leave different micro-wear on the hand axe surfaces.

"Homo erectus" remains one of the most successful and long-lived species of the "Homo" genus. It is generally considered to have given rise to a number of descendant species and subspecies. The oldest known specimen of the ancient human was found in southern Africa. 

"Homo ergaster",
"Homo erectus pekinensis",

"Homo antecessor",
"Homo cepranensis",
"Homo floresiensis",
"Homo georgicus"
"Homo heidelbergensis",
"Homo neanderthalensis",
"Homo rhodesiensis",
"Homo sapiens",

Some of the major "Homo erectus" fossils:




