Leonese language

Leonese language ("Llionés" in Leonese) is the language of León in Spain and the Bragança District of Portugal, and it is one of the Romance languages. Leonese was the language of the Kingdom of León in the Middle Ages.

Leonese is spoken by 25,000 people in the Spanish provinces of León, Zamora and the Portuguese district of Bragança. Leonese is recognised by the UN as ""Seriously Endangered"" and officially recognised by the Autonomous Government.

Leonese is taught in sixteen schools in León city and there are lessons for adults in several villages in the provinces of León and Zamora.

The language has a system with five vowels in a stressed position, represented by "a, e, i, o," and "u" and three (two archiphonemes /I/, /U/ and one phoneme /a/) in non-stressed position, represented by "e, u, "and "a" at the end of word.

For approximately fifteen years some cultural associations have offered courses in Leonese, sometimes with the support or collaboration of local administrations in the provinces of Leon and Zamora. The autonomous community of Castile and León has never collaborated in these courses, which in most cases have taken place in precarious conditions, without continuity or by unqualified teachers and, very often, far from the area where Leonese is spoken.

The UNESCO in its Atlas of Languages in Danger in the World, places Leonese among languages in danger.

Leonese is classified in the worst of the possible situations whose characteristics are: 


Literature written in the Leonese dialect started in the Middle Ages and is still written today. The first written text in Leonese is the "Nodicia of Kesos" (959 or 974), found in Ardón. Other works in Leonese language include the "Fueru de Llión", "Fueru de Salamanca", "Fueru Xulgu", "Códice d'Alfonsu XI", "Disputa d'Elena y María" and "Llibru d'Alixandre".

Important writers are Torres Naharro, Juan del Encina, and Lucas Fernández. Some writers like Caitano Bardón ("Cuentos en Dialecto Leonés"), Luis Maldonado or Aragón Escacena ("Entre brumas") restarted the Leonese literature in the early 20th century. Today, important writers include Eva González in the last 20th century or Abel Pardo, Xuasús González, Adrianu Martín or Félix Llópez.




