The Mask: The Animated Series

The Mask: The Animated Series is a television animated series based on the comic book superhero, The Mask, but with most of its inspiration from the 1994 movie adaptation. The show ran for three seasons, from 1995 to 1997, and spawned its own short-run comic book series, "Adventures of The Mask". 

Tina Carlyle (Cameron Diaz's character in the movie) was absent, but reporter Peggy Brandt had become the main female character. Unlike in the movie, Ipkiss was able to use the mask in daytime as well as at night.

Much as with the "Beetlejuice" cartoon before it, The Mask TAS took many elements from the source movie but dropped characters and changed certain other characters. Peggy's inclusion also officially discounts the cut scene in the movie where she is killed. Tina is never even alluded to. However, the events of the movie are alluded to, as Charlie knew that Stanley was the Mask (though did not know Stanley kept it), and Stanley was still upset over Peggy selling him out to the mob (given that Stanley and Peggy were never treated as a potential couple, there may have remained some bad feelings over that though The Mask himself sometimes tries to woo her). A gypsy at one point claims that the Mask is the most powerful artifact in the world when she remarks "The most powerful artifact in the world and this idiot keeps it with his laundry".

The cartoon, despite having a "realistic" setting in the fictional town of Edge City, would often rely more on Tex Avery-style humor and on occasion, broke any meaningful laws of reality - one episode featured the Goofalotatots, parodies of the Animaniacs, treating them as if they were naturally alive. Another featured the Mask becoming a personal assistant to the President of the US, with the job merely handed to him (the president was a caricature of no real president - it should also be noted that former Mask comic writer John Arcudi wrote both example episodes, a stark departure from his usual writing). Police officers were portrayed as idiots who could not see even obvious clues.

Also continued from the movie was the consistent visiting by The Mask of the Coco Bongo - a fictional, glamorous night club frequented by the Edge City well-to-do, which was most likely based on the Copacabana in New York City. In the episode "A Comedy of Eras", in which Dr. Chronos manipulates time so that the future Edge City becomes a corrupted, "Nineteen Eighty-Four"-like dictatorial society ruled by the villainess, features a Coco Bongo which has been destroyed - a development that horrifies and enrages The Mask and provides him with the motivation to ultimately defeat Dr. Chronos.






The main villain, Dr. Pretorius (voiced by Tim Curry), was a madman who had his own head removed from his body and placed on tiny, spider-like robotic legs, which could attach to a larger android body. His plans always revolved around either obtaining or controlling the Mask (Pretorius is one of the few characters in the series aware of The Mask's true identity), or as part of some increasingly insane "science experiments" which, if carried out, would result in the death of thousands or even the end of mankind. He mostly pronounces Ipkiss' last name as "Ipp-kiss". Pretorius was also likely a parody of drug dealer/mob boss Eugene Rapaz from the original comics (both share the same face. Rapaz wore small, rounded-lens dark glasses and Pretorius had round optic implants that looked similar, as well).

In the episode, "Sister Mask", Dr. Pretorius did eventually gain the mask, and as with Tyrell, retained his own personality while wearing it (While the mask is said to release one's own inhibitions, those who have no inhibitions seem to retain full conscious control while wearing the Mask, such as the Joker in the DC crossover).

Coming from the comics was Walter, Pretorius's goon, still silent and indestructible but not as murderous and cruel. Walter chased the Mask for several episodes, but when he obtained the wooden mask and it failed to work for him, he simply dropped it. Walter remained a recurring character throughout the series. He is strong enough to actually break the Mask in two (an impressive feat as only seconds before the Mask withstood being hit by cars and run over by a steamroller without a scratch).

Ben Stein reprised his role as Dr. Neuman, from the movie. In one episode, the mask falls into Neuman's hands, and he becomes a super-villain. Dr. Neuman rampaged throughout the city, claming everyone suffered from a disease he called"Ipkissiamascosus". He was determined to kill Stanley and even goes as far as to spring Pretorius from prison to aid him (a running gag, however, was that Dr. Neuman refused to believe the mask worked, even when he had it on).

A third villain who made it to the TV series for a few times was the mad Dr. Amelia Chronos, who, with her ambitions of gaining power and dominance through the manipulation of time, often caused quite a lot of chaos through inventions like a machine that kept looping time every half hour for everyone but herself (so that even the Mask could never foil her plans, since by the time he got to her, everything would be reset to a half hour prior), a gun that reversed/fast forwarded time for whoever it was aimed at (so that the person would keep getting younger and younger until he/she became nothing, or became older and older until he/she was dead), a large time portal through which she could summon anything to defeat the Mask (such as prehistoric creatures, robots from the future, etc.) though none of them worked and an actual time machine through which she could travel into the past or future to manipulate events so that she would ultimately be victorious in her quest for world dominance. 

For villains as for the Mask's transformation, there was often DC Comics parodies, as Supermask and Super Salad Man (a parody of Superman). Some Marvel references were made too, like The Mask becoming Biclops (a parody of Cyclops), Spiderhyny (alias Spiderman), Green Surfer (alias Silver Surfer) and Toolverine (a parody of Wolverine), and a villain that turned into a dinosaur like Sauron. Notable were Skillit (parody of Mr. Mxyzptlk and Peter Pan, albeit much more malevolent in nature) and Putty Thing (parody of the version of Clayface, portrayed as a dumb teenager rather than an angry, jaded actor).

The Mask also had a few more villainous enemies in his rogues gallery such as:
















Stanley Ipkiss is the owner and wearer of The Mask, but there have been others who have worn the Mask (either accidentally or intenionally). Some episodes focus on this aspect; someone gets his/hers hands (or face) on the Mask and Stanley usually tries get it back with difficulty. The other wearers are:











1 & 2. The Mask Is Always Greener on the Other Side (Parts 1 & 2): After causing him nothing but trouble, Stanley Ipkiss gets rid of his mask by burying it in quick-drying cement, but must retrieve it to save Peggy and Milo after Pretorius tricks Stanley's friend and coworker, Charlie, into building a "house of tomorrow" and kidnaps them.<br>
3. The Terrible Twos: When Kellaway tries to prove that Stanley is the Mask by handcuffing the two together, Stanley must go to elaborate lengths to get away from the detective when two mutants Putty Thing and Fish Guy (formerly two teenage slackers named Dak and Eddie who irradiated themselves so they can become superheroes) go on the rampage.<br>
4. Baby's Wild Ride: A baby-sitting job turns difficult when the infant acquires the Mask and joins a biker gang with their chief Lonnie The Shark (who is posing as children's show host Barnaby the Dinosaur).<br>
5. Shadow of a Skillit: The youth-stealing Skillit has come to Edge City to steal the souls of Charlie, Peggy, and Milo, and only the Mask can stop him.<br>
6. Sister Mask: Pretorius creates a sister Mask that turns the real Mask into a living puppet in order to use him to steal meteorite fragments with unusual properties.<br>
7. Bride of Pretorius: Stanley dates a shy, quiet girl who works at her bank—and becomes a loud, man-hungry woman when she stumbles upon The Mask. Meanwhile, Pretorious looks for a female companion.<br>
8. Double Reverse: A reverse therapy treatment helps Stanley deprive the Mask of its power by acting like the Mask in his normal state, but when a criminal called Kablamus, capable of exploding and surviving, arrives in the city, Stanley must get the powerless Mask to work once again.<br>
9. Shrink Rap: Stanley rids himself of the mask by giving it to his therapist, Dr. Neuman, who puts it on and starts going on a rampage and joins up with Pretorius, who's planning to nuke the city so he can use the flash of the explosion to photograph an alien race's planet.<br>
10. Martian Mask: FBI agents mistakenly believe The Mask is actually an alien bent on world domination and do everything to capture him, whilst Putty Thing and Fish Guy go on a road trip.<br>
11. Mayor Mask: Frustrated by Edge City's mismanagement, Stanley puts on the Mask hoping he will teach Mayor Tilton a lesson. Instead, The Mask announces his candidacy against Mayor Tilton as the new mayor of Edge City. Though Stanley naturally objects, he is then forced to make sure his alter ego wins the election when he discovers the real Mayor Tilton was captured and that Dr. Pretorius is masquerading as him so he can turn all of Edge City into subjects for toxic waste experiments.<br>
12. How Much Is That Dog in the Tin Can?: Milo puts on The Mask to battle an insane dogcatcher capturing dogs for a (somewhat) sinister purpose. Meanwhile, Walter starts stalking Stanley.<br>
13. All Hallow's Eve: On Halloween night, Skillit escapes from reform school, determined to get revenge on the Mask for making him do homework.<br>
14. Santa Mask: All the villains in Edge City begin disguising themselves as Santa Claus and committing crimes. The Mask must save Christmas by proving Santa's innocence.<br>
15. Split Personality: The Mask breaks in half, resulting in both Stanley and the Mask existing at the same time; unfortunately, with Walter after the Mask and an old high school acquaintance of Stanley's after revenge on Stanley for getting him expelled, the two personalities must work together to piece the mask together.

16. A Comedy of Eras: The Mask battles a mad female scientist named Chronos who sends The Mask to the future and to the era of the Salem Witch Trials.<br>
17. Goin' for the Green: After being humiliated by the Mask during an unveiling of his latest statue, Mayor Tilton recruits Colonel Beauregard Klaxon, a Southern businessman to create The Edge City Games as a distraction from The Mask's antics, but Colonel Klaxon uses this opportunity to store nuclear waste underneath the stadium where the Edge Games are played.<br>
18. Flight as a Feather: Hours before a Swedish karaoke contest at the Coco Bongo, The Mask loses his lucky fedora feather and races through Edge City to get it—all the while trying to avoid Kellaway and Doyle and a string of eccentric characters, including Mayor Tilton's vengeful ex-girlfriend, a performance artist, an eagle, and Pretorious's goon, Walter.<br>
19. The Good, the Bad and the Fish Guy: Putty Thing and Fish Guy return, but with Fish Guy having acquired the Mask, Stanley must convince Putty Thing to work with him before the whole city is destroyed.<br>
20. Malled: When Lonnie the Shark and his men rob a bank at the mega-mall with Stanley caught in the crossfire, Milo must bring the Mask to Stanley.<br>
21. Channel Surfin': The Mask ends up shifting through various television channels after being trapped inside the TV by a supervillain named Channel Surfer.<br>
22. Mask au Gratin: Stanley is hired to show Mrs. Peenman's niece around Edge City during her visit there—and discovers that Mrs. Peenman's niece has an old amulet which transforms her by the moonlight turning into a monster named Gorgonzola who turns anything and everything into cheese.<br>
23. Jurassic Mask: A machine at the Edge City Museum brings to life three dinosaurs who wreak havoc on the city.<br>
24. You Oughta Be in Pictures: Sly Eastenegger, a famous action movie star, and his director choose Edge City to movie his latest movie, and challenges The Mask into a competition over who will be the next action movie star. Meanwhile, Peggy discovers a nuclear bomb stolen from the U.S. government that Eastenegger is plotting to use in his latest movie.<br>
25. For All Mask-Kind: Stanley is chosen to be the first average man to be sent into space—and The Mask comes along for the ride.<br>
26. Up the Creek: After The Mask steals The Eiffel Tower and Mrs. Peenman uses the apartment as a tourist attraction, Stanley's friend and co-worker, Charlie, invites him to a river rafting trip, where the two become the unwilling grooms to two hillbilly brides.<br>
27. Boogie with the Man: Stanley wishes he was as lucky as The Mask, and meets The Devil (disguised as a man named Bob), who gives Stanley his lucky break—in exchange for his soul.<br>
28. What Goes Around Comes Around: Chronos from "A Comedy of Eras" returns and puts Stanley (and the Mask) in a time loop where Stanley—and the Mask—are doomed to repeat the same half-hour.<br>
29. All Hail the Mask: During a trip to a Pacific island, the Mask encounters a tribe who worship him as a god—and plot to sacrifice him (Stanley Ipkiss) after loosing the mask by a spell the witch doctor casts on him.<br>
30. Power of Suggestion: Stanley gets hypnotized by a magician during Edge City's Fluff Ball, but Kablamus crashes the party just before the hypnotist can reverse the spell, giving Kablamus the perfect opportunity to use Stanley (and the Mask) as his personal slave during the Fluff Parade to get back at Mayor Tilton for not choosing him as the grand marshall.<br>
31. Mr. Mask Goes to Washington: The Mask becomes a Presidential bodyguard after saving The President from getting crushed by a falling chunk of building.<br>
32. Rain of Terror: A disrespected weatherman becomes a supervillain named The Tempest, who attacks the city with the elements—and interrupts the Mask's night out.<br>
33. The Mother of All Hoods: After being humiliated by The Mask on a police reality show, Lieutenant Kellaway tries to prove to the Edge City police force (and his visiting mother) that he is a competent police detective by going on a stakeout to uncover plans to have Mayor Tilton kidnapped.<br>
34. To Bee or Not to Bee: A beekeeper gets transformed into a half-bee/half-human creature who hypnotizes the town into working in his beehive.<br>
35. Love Potion No. 8 ½: Stanley buys a love potion from a gypsy (who wants the Mask after learning that it was a part of her family's magic) and accidentally spills it on his curmudgeonly landlady, Mrs. Peenman—resulting in Stanley (and the Mask) falling in love with her.<br>
36. Cool Hand Mask: The Mask is framed by Pretorious for stealing fund raising money from a Little League team and gets sent to prison. With The Mask incarcerated, Pretorious finally puts his evil plans to rule Edge City to use.<br>
37. Broadway Malady: Andrew Bedwetter, a famous Broadway musical director, creates a musical based on the "Mad Monkey" line of action movies, enraging The Mask. Ipkiss reducing the show's budget and the Mask making a crash appearance at the opening night (which proves to be a success) drives the director to insanity, who uses past enemies of The Mask as stars and goes on a rampage on a giant animatronic monkey.<br>
38. Enquiring Masks Want to Know: Skillit unleashes his "toys" (a gang of mythical creatures) on Edge City, and Peggy Brandt (Stanley's tabloid-writing friend) sees this as an opportunity to further her career.<br>
39. Future Mask: The Mask travels into the future to find the robot who ripped his pants, but soon becomes involved in a war between a megalomaniacal future mayor and a team of rebels over the Mask.<br>
40. Sealed Fate: Stanley is forced to sell Tupperware to pay off a bill (run up by his alter ego, The Mask), but Peggy learns that the company producing the Tupperware is bringing the disgusting leftovers to life.<br>
41. (The Angels Wanna Wear My) Green Mask: Lieutenant Kellaway and The Mask die in an explosion caused by a bomb made by The Phony Frenchman (who first appeared in "Up The Creek") and now face a counsel of angels who go over past events to see which one of them will get into Heaven. But when Kellaway unmasked The Mask and reveals once and for all that The Mask is Stanley Ipkiss, the angel counsel also has reveals a horrible secret about themselves as well.<br>
42. Mutiny of the Bounty Hunters: Stanley is once again called upon to babysit his neighbor's baby boy, who runs away in pursuit of the neighbor's pet bird. Meanwhile, Pretorious hires two bounty hunters to help him capture The Mask.<br>
43. Convention of Evil: In this clip show episode, villains from several past episodes (Pretorious, Gorgonzola from "Mask Au Gratin", Lonnie the Shark and his biker gang, "Bob" from "Boogie With The Man", The Tempest, and The Stinger from "To Bee or Not To Bee") hold a convention and discuss the many times The Mask has thwarted their heinous plans.<br>
44. The Green Marine: The Mask is put on trial for his unorthodox actions while serving in the Marines.<br>
45. Counterfeit Mask: Stanley is accused of counterfeiting money after picking up a strange woman's luggage at the airport. Meanwhile, Peggy wears The Mask and fulfills her dream of being glamorous.

46. Magic: Stanley reunites with his high school crush, Davida Steelmine, who is now working as a magician who uses her powers for criminal activity.<br>
47. Little Big Mask: The Mask creates an anti-aging cream, which makes him (and Stanley) younger by the minute.<br>
48. Fantashtick Voyage: A computer virus infects Milo and Stanley thinks The Mask did it.<br>
49. They Came from Within: The Mask gets sucked into a comic book world, where the characters mistake Lieutenant Kellaway for their archenemy.<br>
50. To Have and Have Snot: Pretorious uses Peggy's phlegm from her cold to create a giant mucus monster that infects the people of Edge City. Unfortunately, Stanley learns that having a cold while wearing the Mask has unpredictable (and ultimately fatal) consequences.<br>
51. Mystery Cruise: Stanley and all of his friends (and enemies) are tricked into boarding a cruise by The Mask in order to celebrate The Mask's birthday. Unfortunately, Pretorius plans to use the ship to test his latest weapon.<br>
52. The Goofalotatots: Stanley meets his favorite cartoon characters, The Goofalotatots (a parody of the Warner Brothers and the Warner Sister from Animaniacs), but discovers that they're evil robot duplicates built by Pretorious.<br>
53. When Pigs Ruled the Earth: Peggy and The Mask get sent to a future where pigs rule over man.<br>
54. The Aceman Cometh: Stanley's dog, Milo, is kidnapped by Pretorious and Stanley summons the help of Ace Ventura, Pet Detective (from the movie and animated series of the same name) to find him.

Six VHS volumes of the series were gradually released from 1995 to 1996, all of which are now out of print.

Upon the initial DVD release of "Son of the Mask", Wal-Mart stores sold an exclusive 2-pack of the movie with two episodes of the animated series. As of 2009, this is the only DVD release of the series and no plans for a full release have been announced.


