Ardèche

Ardèche () is a département in the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region of south-central France. It is named after the Ardèche river.

The department of Ardèche was created on 4 March 1790 with seven districts: Annonay, Aubenas, L'Argentière, Privas, Tournon, Vernoux and Villeneuve-de-Berg. The capital was Privas alternating with Annonay, Aubenas, Le Bourg(-Saint-Andéol) and Tournon. In August of that year, the number of districts was reduced to three: Mézenc, Aubenas and Tanargue. In September, Privas became the only capital of the department.

In 1800, with the creation of the "arrondissements" in France, the three districts were changed into three "arrondissements": Privas, L'Argentière and Tournon.

On 18 March 1988, Tournon became Tournon-sur-Rhône.

The Ardèche is part of the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region. It has an area of .

The department is surrounded by the Loire department to the north, the Isère department to the northeast, the Drôme deparment to the east, the Vaucluse to the southeast, the Gard department to the south, the Lozère department to the southwest and the Haute-Loire department to the west.


The highest point in the department is "Mont Mézenc" (; it is high. The lowest point, above sea level, is where the Ardèche river flows into the Rhône (in the south east of the department).

The main rivers in Ardèche are: 

The Allier river forms the border of the Lozère department and the Ardèche for about .

The Köppen climate classification type for the climate at Privas is an "Oceanic climate" (also known as Maritime Temperate climate) and of the subtype Cfb.

Ardèche is managed by the "General Council of Ardèche" in Privas. The department is part of the Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes region.

There are 3 "arrondissements" (districts), 17 "cantons" and 339 "communes" (municipalities) in Ardèche.

The following is a list of the 17 cantons of the Ardèche department, following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:
The inhabitants of Ardèche are known, in French, as "Ardéchois" (women: "Ardéchoises").

Ardèche had a population, in 2013, of 320,379, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Tournon-sur-Rhône, with 135,088 inhabitants, is the "arrondissement" with more inhabitants.

The "communes" in the department with more than 7,000 inhabitants are:




