Lucario

Lucario is a character of the Pokémon anime and video game series. Known as the Aura Pokémon, it has the ability to feel the Auras of all things. It is a Fighting and Steel Pokémon. It is seen in the games "Pokémon Diamond and Pearl", and in the movie "Lucario and the Mystery of Mew". In an interview with "Pokémon Diamond and Pearl" director Junichi Masuda, he noted Lucario's name as one of the hardest to make, because they wanted to make it work for both the Japanese and Americans.

Lucario is a jackal-like Pokémon that's around four feet in height. Lucario's hands are black and have one white spike on each arm on the top of its wrists, and there's a third spike on Lucario's chest. Lucario's nose and ears are longer since it evolved from Riolu. Lucario has a furry yellow body, and its hips are in the shape of what looks like blue shorts. It has the ability to sense the aura in all living things, and can use telepathic human speech. By catching the Aura coming from others, it can read their thoughts. A well-trained one can sense auras of creatures over half a mile away.

Lucario is a Pokémon that appears in the Nintendo DS versions of "Pokémon Diamond and Pearl"; Lucario is used by Maylene, the third Sinnoh Gym Leader, a tag-team partner known as Riley, and by Cynthia, Sinnoh's Elite Four Champion. In "Pokémon Mystery Dungeon" Lucario is seen as the greatest rescue leader of all time, and earning 15,000 Rescue Points will put the player in the top rank - the Lucario rank - and the Lucario statue will be put outside the rescue base.

It is a fighter in Super Smash Bros. Brawl, and uses attacks like Aura Sphere, Force Palm, ExtremeSpeed, Double Team, and its final smash, Aura Storm. Lucario was confirmed to be a playable character in "Super Smash Bros. Brawl" due to a leak. After seeing their mistake they quickly fixed it. Lucario and Jigglypuff can no longer be seen but there are many YouTube videos which show proof of the leak, as well as screen shots. 

In Pokémon X and Y, the player receives a free Lucario from Korrina. It can Mega Evolve into Mega Lucario using the Lucarionite.

Lucario's main role in the anime is his appearance in the eighth Pokémon movie, "Pokémon: Lucario and the Mystery of Mew". In the movie, Lucario is a servant to Sir Aaron in a Renaissance-themed city called Cameron Palace. Aaron had trained this Lucario to use aura. Lucario thinks of Sir Aaron as both his master and close friend. After Aaron traps him in a magic staff at the film's start, Lucario begins questioning any Pokémon-human relationship. The Lucario in the movie, can also speak human languages without psychic powers. Lucario sacrificed himself in order to save the Tree of Beginning, though the credits showed him with Sir Aaron eating a chocolate bar.

Maylene in the anime, like in the games, has a Lucario and it was seen in four episodes. It was first seen battling with Maylene in their training. Lucario used Aura Sphere to stop the battle of Electabuzz, Piplup, and Pikachu, and is seen battling Paul's Pokémon in a flashback. Lucario was seen again where it battled in Dawn's gym battle with Maylene, where it defeated Dawn's Ambipom and Piplup. Then, in the next episode, it battled in Ash's gym battle against Maylene. It defeated Ash's Staravia and Chimchar, but was knocked out along with Ash's Buizel, which ended in a tie. Finaly, Lucario was seen when it helped Ash and the others defeat Saturn and Team Galactic.

In the Pokémon Adventures manga, like in games, it appears under the ownership of Riley who was on a boat heading to the Battle Frontier. Diamond meets Riley at Iron Island, and Byron asks Riley to help Diamond sharpen his Pokémon battle skills before Diamond goes to Lake Verity. In "Pokémon Diamond and Pearl Adventure!" the main character, Hareta, gained a Riolu egg which hatched into a Riolu later on in that chapter and then evolved in to Lucario.

UGO described Lucario as "a new breed of Pokémon, with a cooler, more dangerous look. It's quick and possesses a damaging set of attacks", yet called it lame due to its status as a Pokémon. IGN called its presence in "Super Smash Bros. Brawl" "a bit on the head scratching side" in light of more familiar characters in the title such as Pikachu. Although another editor stated that it would make sense for "Pokémon" to be represented by a fighting-type Pokémon, since "Super Smash Bros Brawl" is a fighting game. GamesRadar described it as an "all-around bad-ass" and "the Bruce Lee of Pokémon", suggesting its design as similar to the Egyptian God Anubis. Beckett "Pokémon" Unofficial Collector editor Sean Cooper stated that Lucario had grown popular in recent years due to his starring role in "Lucario and the Mystery of Mew" and his appearance in "Super Smash Bros. Brawl".


