Twilight (2008 movie)

Twilight is a 2008 American teen romantic-fantasy movie. It is based on the novel by Stephenie Meyer. The movie was directed by Catherine Hardwicke and stars Robert Pattinson, Kristen Stewart, and Taylor Lautner. Stephenie Meyer has a cameo appearance in the movie. The movie is about a teenage girl and a vampire falling in love.

The movie was a huge success. It was released in cinemas on November 21, 2008 and grossed $35.7 million on this day. Since then, it has gone on to gross over $382,133,300 worldwide. The soundtrack for the movie was released on November 4, 2008 and debuted at #1 on the Billboard 200. The soundtrack contains all of the music from the movie including music created and sung by actor Robert Pattinson, who appeared in the movie.

Isabella Swan, who is seventeen years old, moves to Forks, a small town in Washington, to live with her father, Charlie, after her mother remarries. She meets many new friends at High School and they inform her about the Cullen family, and Bella becomes intrigued. Edward Cullen, who is in Bella's Biology class, acts very strangely when he sees her for the first time, which makes Bella confused. A few days later, Bella is almost hit with a van in the school parking lot. Edward manages to move extremely quickly by her side and pushes the van away with his hand, leaving a huge pressure mark in the side of the van. Bella did not know how he managed to do this, so she is determined to find out. However, Edward refuses to explain what happened, and warns her not to be friends with him.

After Bella does lots of research, she finds out that Edward Cullen is a vampire. Bella and Edward fall in love and Edward introduces her to his family, Carlisle, Esme, Alice, Jasper, Emmett, and Rosalie who are also vampires. They invite Bella to play baseball with them, and she agrees. However, three other vampires called James, Victoria and Laurent arrive and disrupt the game. James, who is a tracker vampire, is intrigued by Edward's protectiveness over a human and wants to hunt Bella. Edward and his family risk their lives to protect her, but James gets Bella on her own after lying to her that he was holding her mother hostage. James attacks Bella and bites her wrist, but Edward, along with the other Cullen family members, arrives before he can kill her. James is destroyed, and Edward sucks James's venom from Bella's wrist, preventing her from becoming a vampire. A severely injured Bella is taken to a hospital. Upon returning to Forks, Bella and Edward attend their school prom. While there, Bella expresses her desire to become a vampire, which Edward ignores. The movie ends with Victoria secretly watching the pair dancing, plotting revenge for her love.


