1988-89 NHL season

The 1988–89 NHL season was the 72nd season of the National Hockey League. Twenty-one teams each played 80 games. The Calgary Flames won an all Canadian Stanley Cup final against the Montreal Canadiens four games to two. To date, this is the last time two Canadian teams squared off for the Stanley Cup.

"Note: W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, GF= Goals For, GA = Goals Against, Pts = Points, PIM = Penalties in minutes"

"Note: GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points"

Hartford Whalers vs. Montreal Canadiens

"Montreal wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 0"

Buffalo Sabres vs. Boston Bruins

"Boston wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 1"

Washington Capitals vs. Philadelphia Flyers

"Philadelphia wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 2"

New York Rangers vs. Pittsburgh Penguins

"Pittsburgh wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 0"

Chicago Blackhawks vs. Detroit Red Wings

"Chicago wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 2"

Minnesota North Stars vs. St. Louis Blues

"St. Louis wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 1"

Vancouver Canucks vs. Calgary Flames
"Calgary wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 3"

Edmonton Oilers vs. Los Angeles Kings

"Los Angeles wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 3"

Boston Bruins vs. Montreal Canadiens

"Montreal wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 1"

Philadelphia Flyers vs. Pittsburgh Penguins

"Philadelphia wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 3"

Chicago Blackhawks vs. St. Louis Blues

"Chicago wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 1"

Los Angeles Kings vs. Calgary Flames

"Calgary wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 0"

Philadelphia Flyers vs. Montreal Canadiens

"Montreal wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 2"

Chicago Blackhawks vs. Calgary Flames

"Calgary wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 1"

Montreal Canadiens vs. Calgary Flames

The Stanley Cup Finals was decided between the top two teams during the 1988–89 NHL regular season. Captain Lanny McDonald scored the second Flames goal in Game 6. This turned out to be the last goal in his NHL Hall of Fame career because he retired during the following off-season. Doug Gilmour scored two goals in the third period, including the eventual game and Cup winner to cement the victory for the Flames.

"Calgary wins best-of-seven series 4 games to 2"

"Note: GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points"

The following is a list of players of note who played their first NHL game in 1988–89 (listed with their first team, stars(*) mark start in playoffs):

The following is a list of players of note that played their last game in the NHL in 1988–89 (listed with their last team):



