Liège (province)

Liège (; ; ) is the easternmost province of the Walloon Region, in Belgium. Its capital is the city of Liège.

It is an area of French and German ethnic groups. Most of its inhabitants speak French and a minority of them speaks German.

The present province comes from a department created by the French government in the late eighteenth century, the Department of Ourte. In 1815, after the defeat of Napoleon, the eastern part (Eupen, Malmedy, Saint-Vith and four other German municipalities) was given to the Prussian empire.

While maintaining the French administrative borders, King William I of the Netherlands gave back the more traditional names of the provinces instead of the names used by the French. He named the province as Liège, remembering the old principality of Liège, although the region did not correspond much to the old principality.

In 1919, after the Prussian defeat, the cantons Eupen, Malmedy and Saint-Vith were again part of the province of Liège.

The province of Liège is in southeastern Belgium and borders on (clockwise from the North) the Netherlands, Germany, Luxembourg and in Belgium the provinces of Luxembourg, Namur, Walloon Brabant (Wallonia), and those of Flemish Brabant and Limburg (Flanders).

The province has an area of , with a population of and a density of inhabitants per km². The province is divided into four arrondissements ("arrondissementen" in Dutch) with 84 municipalities, 75 French-speaking municipalities and 9 German-speaking municipalities.

With , the Signal de Botrange is the highest point of the province and of Belgium. It is in Waimes, Verviers district.

The main river is the Meuse (Dutch: Maas) river; its source is in France, in Champagne-Ardenne and then flows through Belgium by the provinces of Namur and Liège. After , it flows into the North Sea.

Other rivers in the province are:

The province of Liège is divided into 4 "arrondissements" (Huy, Liège, Verviers and Waremme) and a total of 84 municipalities.

Population on 1 January of each year.



