Virgin Atlantic Airways

Virgin Atlantic Airways Ltd. (known as Virgin Atlantic) is an airline that is based in the United Kingdom. Virgin Atlantic is owned by 2 companies, Virgin Group and Delta Air Lines. Virgin Atalntic goes from its main hubs at London Heathrow Airport and London Gatwick Airport to many places like the USA, the Caribbean, Africa, the Middle East, Asia and Australia. More than 75% of Virgin Atlantic's flights go/come to London Heathrow Airport. The rest mostly fly from London Gatwick Airport, Manchester Airport or Glasgow Airport. Virgin flies to 31 cities. These are either in Africa, Asia, Europe, the United States or the Caribbean. 

Virgin Atlantic has lots of partners. Here is a list of them:

Virgin Atlantic owns 10 Airbus A330 11 Airbus A340 planes, 10 Boeing 747 planes and 5 Boeing 787 planes. It also has an order for 6 Airbus A380 planes, another order is for 8 Boeing 787 planes.

Virgin Atlantic used to have some other aircraft too. It used to own 5 Airbus A320s, 3 Airbus A321s, 1 Boeing 747-100, 22 Boeing 747-200s and 4 Vickers Viscounts. Virgin Atlantic's first plane was a Boeing 747-200. 

Virgin Atlantic uses three different classes on their planes: Economy, Economy and Upper Class. 

Economy class is the standard class on Virgin Atlantic aircraft. It is the cheapest part of the plane to travel in. Passengers usually get a free meal, some drinks and a bag with gifts in like a toothbrush. The seats in this class have a maximum pitch of 31 in, but this depends on what plane the passenger goes in.

Passengers that use Premium Economy have their own check-in area. They get to get on the plane before Economy passengers and a drink before the flight. They get a better seat and a special cabin crew. The seat it wider and more distance from the seat in front of it.

In November 2006, Virgin made a new seat. It is wider than the old one and has a plug for laptops. It is being put on all planes and now, all Airbus A340s and all Boeing 747s that fly from London Heathrow Airport have the new seats.

Upper Class is the name for Virgin Atlantic's . They do not have a first class service. Virgin says the seats are the biggest lie flat beds on any business class (it is 202 cm long and 84 cm wide), but Air Canada and Singapore Airlines have said this too. The seats have plugs for laptops and iPods.
Upper Class passengers can also have their own chauffeur, check-in, their own security points at some airports, access to the Virgin Clubhouse (a special area, with a bar and seats), a larger for in-flight meals and a bar that passengers can stand up or sit down at in flight.

All the seats on all the aircraft have screens in the back of the seats to provide entertainment for passengers. Most planes have a newer system where the passengers can choose what they want to watch called V:Port. Older systems called "Odyssey" and "Super Nova" just offer different channels for the passengers to pick from. The screens on the older systems are also smaller. Virgin was among the first airlines to have games on its personal screens. 




