Metroid Prime 3: Corruption

Metroid Prime 3: Corruption is a first-person adventure video game made by Retro Studios and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo Wii game console.

This game begins with a meeting between Samus and three other bounty hunters (Basically, hunters who are looking to do good) about a computer virus(computer crashes) caused by Phazon. The four bounty hunters must try and stop it. But in the middle of the meeting, some Space Pirates crash into the frigate(a big space ship) and stop the meeting. Samus and the other bounty hunters must instead stop both the Space Pirates and the virus. Samus lands on the local planet, Norion, and must bring Generators A, B, and C online.

As Samus prepares to activate the last generator, Meta Ridley flies in and breaks the floor of the generator area, and Samus is forced to fight him in a long hole down to the planet's core. She eventually beats him, and brings Generator C online, and heads to the control room. Samus meets up with the other Hunters. Samus takes the keyboard of the control pad, and then Dark Samus attacks the bounty hunters, but Samus survives, as does the rest of the bounty hunters. The rest of the bounty hunters fall into a coma, while Samus manages to destroy the asteroid with the laser (which is connected to the Generators) before she falls into a coma (a deep sleep) herself.

A month later, Samus finds out that Dark Samus' Phazon(like poison in our world but worse) based attacks have corrupted her. She (along with the rest of the bounty hunters) is fitted with a Phazon Enhancement Device (PED) which allows her to use the Phazon within her. She finds out that her fellow bounty hunters have gone missing. Samus now goes to several planets, named Bryyo, Elysia, and the Pirate Homeworld, where she finds that the inhabitants are all slowly being corrupted by the Phazon. Once Samus finishes that, she lands on planet "Phaaze". Seconds after she lands, Samus's PED Suit is in constant Hyper Mode because Phazze's atmosphere is corrupting her, so she needs to drain all at least 10 energy tanks in order to stay "nonCorrupted" . The meter is her energy tanks filling up. If it reaches the top, Samus dies, or becomes so corrupted that she becomes another Dark Samus. Meanwhile, she finally finds Dark Samus and they fight. Samus wins, then corrupts the problem, and then Phaaze is destroyed.

It turned out that Phazze, a planet, was the source of Dark Samus, as well as the source of all Phazon. It would send meteors called "Leviathan Seeds" to some planets, like it did to Tallon IV and Aether, splitting Aether into "Light Aether" and "Dark Aether". It is made of pure Phazon, with gaseous Phazon for its atmosphere, liquid for its "water", and solid for its ground. With its destruction, all the Phazon in the universe is destroyed, even the Phazon in Samus herself. 

This is the first Metroid game for the Nintendo Wii, and so the controls have been changed to fit the controller. There is also a unique mode, called "Hyper Mode". The player uses the Nunchuk to move and use the grapple, as well as Morph Ball and Lock on. He or she also uses the Wii remote (commonly called Wiimote) for Hypermode, as well as all weaponry and jumping, and aiming.


