The Lion King II: Simba's Pride

The Lion King II: Simba's Pride is a 1998 American direct-to-video animated movie and the sequel to "The Lion King". It is about Simba and Nala's cub, Kiara, who meets a cub named Kovu. Like how the first movie was based on the Shakespeare play "Hamlet", this movie is similar to another Shakespeare play, "Romeo and Juliet". It was later retitled The Lion King 2: Simba's Pride when it was re-released as a special edition DVD on August 31, 2004. In 1998, Disney believed that "Simba's Pride" would be so popular that it shipped 15 million copies to stores for the October 27 release date. Disney sold 3.5 million copies in three days. Thirteen million copies were sold while it was still in print in the late 90s. In 2004, another sequel was released, a part prequel-part midquel (called an "in between-quel" by its teaser trailer), "The Lion King 1½".

Simba and Nala have a daughter, Kiara. Timon and Pumbaa are assigned to be her babysitters, but she easily escapes their care and ventures into the forbidden lands. There she meets a lion cub named Kovu and they become friends. What she and her parents do not know is that Kovu is the son of Zira - a banished follower of the now-dead Scar. She plans to raise Kovu to overthrow Simba and become the king of the Pride Lands. This tests not only Kiara and Kovu's relationship as they mature, but Simba's relationship with his daughter.

Singing voices

An audio CD entitled "Return to Pride Rock: Songs Inspired by Disney's The Lion King II: Simba's Pride" was released in 1999. Although not promoted as a soundtrack to the movie, it contained all the songs from the movie and some additional songs inspired by it by Lebo M. The complete track list of the CD:
(A * indicates songs inspired by the movie)

On August 31, 2004, Disney released an "enhanced soundtrack" to coincide with the movie's 2-Disc Special Edition DVD. However the CD contained everything from the "Return to Pride Rock" CD except the "inspired songs".



