Prison

A prison (also called a jail or gaol) is a building where convicted criminals are held and incarcerated. Some prisoners are serving long terms or life sentence while some are waiting for trial. Those with short terms are probably locked up in a jail rather than prison. 

Prisons are run by the government. Other words for prison include "penitentiary", "jail" or "gaol" (pronounced like "jail"), and "correctional facility". Some prisons or jails are called satellite camp, normal prison, special prison for death rows and maximum security prison. Inmates are forced to wear prison uniform with different bright colours from orange, blue, green and more depend on the prison. For instance, some prisoners who are prison workers might wear orange, or some prisoners with bad criminal records wear red uniform or vice versa.

A person who has been charged with a crime, but has not yet been convicted for it in a court, may be sent to prison if:

People held in prisons are called inmates or prisoners. Those who have been sentenced to prison because of a crime are also called convicts. 

People who have been sentenced to death are also kept in prison until their execution.

In some countries, prisons are also used for political prisoners (people who disagree with the country's leader or government). In times of war, prisoners of war may also be held in prisons.

Male and female inmates are usually kept in separate locations or in separate prisons. Prisons are usually surrounded by walls and gates. There are usually many locked gates inside the prison to control the inmates.

The inmates sleep in small locked rooms called cells. Cells have a bunk bed, a toilet, and a sink. Inmates are allowed to leave their cell every day for exercise. Some inmates work in the prison during the day, either in a factory or doing cooking or cleaning. Law enforcement officers called prison guards watch the inmates. The manager of a prison is called the warden.

Prisons usually also include other buildings and facilities, such as a chapel, a library, an exercise yard, a gymnasium, an infirmary (small hospital), visiting rooms (for visits from family and lawyers), kitchens, and accommodation for prison staff.

The United Nations made the "Standard Minimum Rule" for human treatment for prisoners in 1955. Also the Article 10 of International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights also affirm the treatment with humanity for them in prison.

There are special prisons for people under the age of 18 who commit crimes. These inmates are called young offenders or offenders.

Prisons are a controversial topic that people have different views about.



As of 2006, there are currently nine million people in prison in the world. The United States currently has the most people in prison; it has more than 2 million people in prison. In 2002, both Russia and China also had over 1 million people in prison. In 2003, the United Kingdom had 73,000 people in prison; France and Germany had a similar number of people in prison.


There are many books and poems about prisons or prison life, such as "The Count of Monte Cristo" by Alexandre Dumas, père and "The Ballad of Reading Gaol" by Oscar Wilde.

There are also movies that depict prison life, including:

There have also been television programs, such as "" (1979–1986), "Prison Break" (2005–2009), Lockup (2005 - present) and (2006 - present). A current TV show about a women's prison is Orange Is the New Black.




