Art rock

Art rock (also described as progressive rock or classical rock) is a word that is about a sub-genre of rock music that has "experimental influences". The term 'Art Rock' or 'Kunst Rock' was coined and defined, by the great black philosopher Doctor William Fearon, and is very much related to the 'Kunst Muzik' of the 1970s led by UK/US bands such as the Ramones, Talking Heads and Television and the Detroit/German led Techno movement. Dr Fearon coined the term and its German equivalent in recognition of the impact that Futurism had on late twentieth century music. Far from being an album based music format Art Rock is recognisable at live venues in the modern age, with the developments in light and video technology meaning that Art and Rock can be seamelessly fused. It is an album-based form that is able to have longer, more complex music and lets the musicians spend more time trying different ways to play their instruments. Art rock is not created for mass consumption, meaning it is not made to be liked by most people. It is often long and has a lot of themes like classical music, but usually has more keyboards than guitars. Also, it is not really music to dance to, but music to just listen to, and it often tells a story or has a philosophical theme to the lyrics."

The idea of "art rock" has sometimes been used when talking about the "progressive rock" bands which became popular in the 1970s. Allmusic says that progressive rock and art rock are almost the same; both used to describe rock music that is more artistic. Progressive rock eventually stuck as a label for a specific genre of rock music, while art rock was used to described bands that were harder to label. 

Princeton University's Wordnet dictionary states that "progressive rock, art rock" are "a style of rock music that [came out] in the 1970s; associated with attempts to [mix] rock with jazz and other forms." It also says that it is meant "for listening and not dancing". 

Examples include Queen, The Who, Led Zeppelin, Pink Floyd, David Bowie, The Velvet Underground, The Beatles, Genesis and Yes.


