The Hound of the Baskervilles

The Hound of the Baskervilles is a Sherlock Holmes novel. Sir Arthur Conan Doyle started writing it in 1901 and finished it in 1902. It was very popular, because fans had been waiting a long time for a new Sherlock Holmes story. This was because Conan Doyle had killed off Sherlock Holmes in the story "The Final Problem", originally published in 1893 and afterwards collected in the book "The Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes". He was later revealed to be alive in "The Adventure of the Empty House" (originally published in 1903), a story in the book "The Return of Sherlock Holmes", which was released in 1905.

The book tells the story of how Holmes and his friend Doctor Watson solve the mystery of the death of Sir Charles Baskerville. In the story, people think that he died because of a family curse, to do with an evil dog. In the end, the dog is revealed to be a trained big dog painted with glow-in-the-dark paint to make it seem evil.

Dr James Mortimor comes to Sherlock Holmes and Dr Watson in regard to the Baskerville family of Devon. Charles Baskerville who was one of the last of his families lineage was an elderly man who took very seriously the legend of the family's curse: In 1647 his ancestor Hugo Baskerville had attempted to catch a young woman whom he carried off; the girl had died of fear while Hugo was killed by a gigantic hound. Charles Baskerville died of a heart attack while apparently fleeing a gigantic hound. As he was unmarried and had no heirs, his estate goes to his nephew Henry Baskerville of Canada who is arriving in London. Although Holmes is not supersticious he does deceide to take the case. Upon meeting the heir, several odd things happen: an unsigned note is delivered to Henry Baskerville warning him to stay away from the moor; then Henry's shoes beginning missing and turning up-first a new shoe and then an old one; lastly Holmes spots a stranger in a cab following Henry and Dr Mortimor.

Holmes cannot go to Devon so he sends Dr Watson in his place as both a bodyguard to Sir Henry and as a spy. Dr Watson reports the eccentric happenings in Devon: the Baskerville Butler Barrymore and his wife who act strangely; Jack Stapleton an ex-schoolmaster and eccentric butterfly collector and his sister Beryl; a local busybody/and crank Frankland and his estranged daughter Laura Lyons. Lastly there is a deranged convict escaper named Sheldon on the moor. Beryl Stapleton first mistakes Watson for Sir Henry, warning him to go away; when she meets Sir Henry who begins to be attracted to her-although her brother strongly objects to their meeting together. Watson and Sir Henry find out the reason for the Barrymores strange actions-they are secretly helping Mrs Barrymore brother-the escaped convict. Barrymore does reveal that he accidently found a burned note to Charles Baskerville asking him to meet outside the hall from someone named L.L.

Watson confronts Laura Lyons who admits that Charles Baskerville had financed her typewriting business and denys meeting him on the night of his death. Watson is also confronted by Franklin who claims that he spotted the escaped convict on the moor hiding out in a old stone hut; Watson deceides to investigate and finds the stranger is none other than Holmes! Holmes reveals that his prime suspect is Stapleton-who is the husband not the brother of Beryl; suddenly they hear a scream and run out to find a dead man at the foot of a cliff-it is Sheldon the convict who was wearing Henry Baskerville cast off clothing. After meeting Stapleton, Holmes and Watson go to Baskerville Hall where Holmes tells Sir Henry to keep his dinner engagement with the Stapletons for the next night-although neither Holmes or Watson can go with Sir Henry as they must leave for London. Instead of leaving for London, Holmes and Watson confront Laura Lyons who is forced to admit that Stapleton had promised marriage to her; the meeting with Sir Charles was to have been a loan connected with her divorce expenses. It was Stapleton who persuaded her not to meet with Sir Charles at the last second and also to keep quiet about the note. Holmes and Watson meet Inspector Lestrade who has a arrest warrant. That night the three men spy out Stapleton and Sir Henry; when Sir Henry leaves to walk home, a gigantic glowing hound nearly attacks him but is killed by Holmes and Watson. At Stapletons House the men find Beryl who has been tied up and beaten by Stapleton. Stapleton flees to the moor but falls into the Grimpen Mire.

Holmes reveals his deductive reasoning: the warning note had a woman's perfume scent; the theft of the shoes gave a clue that the dog was real; Stapleton-who was a spiritual and physical throwback to Hugo Baskerville {Holmes noticed the resembelence to the family portraits}; his real name was Rodger Baskerville Jr {his father was the youngest of the Baskerville brothers and had to flee England for Central America}. After marring a local beauty Beryl Garcia, he had purloined public money and fled to England where he started a school in Yorkshire; the tudor he had hired died of consumpation and the school which Roger Baskerville then tried to use to teach his pupils crime was forced to close after an epidemic killed three students. He then fled to Devon where he supported himself by bulgary and in the process committed a murder. When he found out that one life was between him and a valuable estate and that Sir Charles had both a weak heart and took the family legend seriously, he bought a large savage dog and hid it on the moor. He tricked Laura Lyons into writing the appoiment note for sir Charles and sent the dog-coated with phosperous-after the old man who died of a heart attack. He tried the same trick on his cousin Henry twice-the first time however it was the convict wearing Henry cloathing that fell victium. He had tied up his wife so she could not warn Sir Henry of the danger he was in. In Holmes words: Roger Baskerville aka Jack Stapleton has for years been a dangerous and desperate man and one of the few foes worthy of confronting Sherlock Holmes {The others being Dr Grmesby Roylott and Professor Moriaty}.




