The Jackson 5

The Jackson 5 was an American musical group who played R&B, soul, pop, and disco. The group was made up of the Jackson brothers Michael, Jackie, Tito, Jermaine, and Marlon. Michael was the lead singer. They recorded on the famous Motown label for a long time. In 1975 they moved to another record label called CBS Records and changed their name to The Jacksons. Some of their songs were "I Want You Back", "ABC", "I'll Be There", "Santa Claus Is Coming to Town" and "I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus". Michael left The Jacksons in 1984.

The Jackson 5 started in Gary, Indiana. They performed for the first time in 1964. Michael was six years old. In 1966, the Jackson 5 won a talent contest at a high school in Gary. 

In 1968 The Jackson 5 were signed to Motown.

In December 1969 Motown released The Jackson 5's first album, "Diana Ross Presents The Jackson 5". One single, "I Want You Back", was released from the album. It reached number one in the United States. The band's next two singles "ABC" and "The Love You Save" also reached number one. In 1970 the group had another number one, "I'll Be There". That year they released three studio albums, "ABC", "Third Album", and "Jackson 5 Christmas Album". In 1971 they released two studio albums. "Maybe Tomorrow" was number one in the American soul albums chart for six weeks. "Goin' Back to Indiana", a live album, was released in September. Motown also released the group's first Greatest Hits album.

Michael released his first album without his brothers, "Got to Be There" in January 1972. In 1972 the group released one album, "Lookin' Through the Windows". In 1973 The Jackson 5 released two studio albums, "Skywriter" and "Get It Together". They also released their second live album "The Jackson 5 in Japan". In 1974 "Dancing Machine" was released. "Dancing Machine" reached number two. In 1975 The Jackson 5's last album on Motown was released. Epic Records signed them. Jermaine left the band. His brother Randy took his place.

In 1976 the band released their first album as The Jacksons. It was their first album on Epic Records. It was written by Gamble And Huff. In 1977 "Goin Places" was released by Epic and Philadelphia International Records. Five singles were released from the album.

"Destiny" was released in 1978. It was written and produced by the brothers. "Blame It on the Boogie", a cover of a Mick Jackson song, was released as the first single from the album. The second single "Shake Your Body (Down to the Ground)" reached number seven in the US "Billboard" 100.

"Triumph" was released in 1980. It reached number-one on the "Billboard" R&B Albums chart. Four singles were released from the album. In 1984 The Jacksons released a single with Mick Jagger called "State of Shock". Later that year Michael left the band after his album "Thriller" became the best-selling album ever released and won eight Grammy Awards.

The Jacksons released their last album, "2300 Jackson Street" in 1989. Michael and Marlon were not in the album except on the single "2300 Jackson Street". Rebbie, La Toya, and Janet Jackson also sung on it.

Motown releases (as The Jackson 5)

CBS/Epic releases (as The Jacksons)


