George Wallace

George Corley Wallace (August 25, 1919 – September 13, 1998) was an American politician. He served as Governor of Alabama serving from 1963 to 1967. He ran for President of the United States two times.

Wallace was born in Cilio, Alabama. He began his long political career at the age of 33 after running for county judge.

When Wallace was running for President, he was shot and paralyzed for the rest of his life. His is known for having different views on segregation. He was a Democrat.

Wallace died at the age of 79 from a spinal infection after 26 years of being in a wheelchair.

Wallace was born George Corely Wallace on August 25, 1919 in Clio, Alabama. He studied at University of Alabama. He grew up in a lower middle class family. As a young man, he was an amateur boxer, where he fought as a bantamweight.

Wallace was a very short man for his entire life, and as an adult was about 5'2" (1.57m)

He served four terms as governor of Alabama, and also ran for President of the United States several times, during the 1960s and 1970s. Wallace was a longtime supporter of segregation; a policy that did not allow African-Americans to attend the same schools, or go to many of the same public places, as white people. In 1963 he stood in a schoolhouse door to prevent black students from attending the school (which would have integrated the school). In a speech, he said he would support "segregation today, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever". He was a controversial figure. Some people saw him as a man who spoke up for the poor and was an outspoken populist. Others viewed him as a terrible person, a white supremacist who encouraged violence.

In time, he changed his views, and said that he was sorry to African-Americans, and other people hurt by segregation. He promoted black equality in his last term as Governor. Despite this, he remains an icon of racism today and many people think of him as one of the most evil figures in American history.

During the 1972 presidential campaign, Wallace was shot five times by a would-be assassin, Arthur Bremer. He suffered permanent injury to his spine. He could no longer walk, and spent the rest of his life using a wheelchair.

After his last term as governor, he began speaking in public places (including churches), to promote tolerance and friendship between people of different races.

Wallace was married to Laurleen Wallace until her death. Then he was married to Corelia Wallace until they divorced. Then he was married to Lisa Taylor until they divored. He had four children.

The Lynyrd Skynyrd song "Sweet Home Alabama" has the line "In Birmingham they love the Governor / Boo Boo Boo / Now we all did what we could do / if watergate does not bother me / does your conscience bother you now tell me true." Even though Wallace is not mentioned by name, the line clearly refers to him, and members of the band have confirmed this and have said they disliked Wallace.

Gary Sinise played him in the film "George Wallace".

A tunnel on Interstate 10 in Alabama has been named the George Wallace Memorial Tunnel.
Wallace died on September 13, 1998 in Montgomery, Alabama from a spinal infection, aged 79. He was buried at Greenwood Cemetery in Montgomery.



