The Aristocats

The Aristocats is a 1970 American animated musical adventure-romantic comedy movie. It was produced by Walt Disney Productions and released by Buena Vista Distribution. It is the 20th Disney animated movie. The movie is based on a story by Tom McGowan and Tom Rowe. It is about a family of aristocratic cats, and how an alley cat helps them after a butler has kidnapped them to gain his mistress's fortune which was meant to go to them. The movie features the voices of Eva Gabor, Hermione Baddeley, Phil Harris, Dean Clark, Sterling Holloway, Scatman Crothers, and Roddy Maude-Roxby. 

In 1962, "The Aristocats" began as an original script for a two-part live-action episode for "Walt Disney's Wonderful World of Color" developed by writers Tom McGowan and Tom Rowe and producer Harry Tytle. Following two years of re-writes, Walt Disney suggested the project would be more suitable for an animated movie, and placed the project in turnaround as "The Jungle Book" advanced into production. When "The Jungle Book" was nearly complete, Disney appointed Ken Anderson to develop preliminary work on "The Aristocats". It would mark the last movie project to be approved by Disney before his death in December 1966.

"The Aristocats" was released on December 11, 1970, to positive reception, and was a box office success.

The movie takes place in Paris in 1910. A mother cat named Duchess and her three kittens, Marie, Berlioz, and Toulouse, are going to receive a fortune when their owner dies. But Edgar, their butler, does not like this and plans to send the cats away.

He places sleeping tablets in their dinner. At night, he plans on dropping them off in the countryside. Two hound dogs, Napoleon and Lafayette, attack him, and the cats are now stranded.

In the morning, they meet an alley cat named Abraham de Lacy Giuseppe Casey Thomas O'Malley (called just Thomas O'Malley). He helps them on their way back home. He even lets them stay at his "pad" (the place where he and his "gang", or friends, stay).

They finally get back home, but Edgar recatches them in a sack and plans to send them to Timbuktu, Africa. O'Malley, Scat Cat and his gang, Roquefort and Frou-Frou all fight Edgar, while Roquefort rescues Duchess and kittens. In the end, Edgar is kicked into the trunk, locked inside, and sent to Timbuktu himself. Madame Adelaide's will is rewritten to not include Edgar and include O'Malley, and she starts a charity foundation which gives a home to all the cats in Paris.


The movie was released on VHS in Europe on January 1, 1990. It was first released on VHS in North America in the Masterpiece Collection series on April 24, 1996.

In January 2000, Walt Disney Home Video launched the Gold Classic Collection, with "The Aristocats" re-released on VHS and DVD on April 4, 2000. The DVD contained the movie in its 1.33:1 aspect ratio enhanced with 2.0 Dolby surround sound. The Gold Collection release quietly discontinued in 2006. A new single-disc Special Edition DVD (previously announced as a 2-Disc set) was released on February 5, 2008.

Disney released the movie for the first time on Blu-ray on August 21, 2012. The 2-disc Special Edition Blu-ray/DVD combo (both in Blu-ray and DVD packaging) features a new digital transfer and new bonus material. A single disc DVD edition was also released on the same day.


"" includes "Thomas O'Malley Cat" on the and "Everybody Wants to Be a Cat" on the . "Disney's Greatest Hits" includes "Ev'rybody Wants to Be a Cat" on the red disc.



