List of NHL franchise post-season droughts

These are lists of active and all-time NHL team post-season, post-season series win, Stanley Cup Final and Stanley Cup droughts up to and including the 2014 Stanley Cup Playoffs. Those teams which have never made it in team history are listed by the season that they entered the league, either as a new team or when they merged into the NHL from the WHA. These lists do not include the canceled 2004–05 NHL season.

A post-season appearance drought is continued by not making the NHL playoffs after the regular season. Since the first round of the playoffs consists of 8 series (16 teams) and there are 30 teams in the NHL, there will always be 14 teams that did not make the most recent playoffs on this list.

The other 16 teams – Anaheim Ducks, Chicago Blackhawks, Dallas Stars, Detroit Red Wings, Florida Panthers, Los Angeles Kings, Minnesota Wild, Nashville Predators, New York Islanders, New York Rangers, Philadelphia Flyers, Pittsburgh Penguins, St. Louis Blues, San Jose Sharks, Tampa Bay Lightning, and Washington Capitals – all qualified for the 2016 Stanley Cup playoffs. 

A post-season series win drought is continued either by not making the playoffs in a season or by making the playoffs in a season but subsequently losing the first round series. Since the first round of the NHL playoffs consist of 8 series (16 teams), there will always be 22 teams in this list – the 14 teams that do not qualify for the post-season, plus the 8 teams that lose their first round series.

The other 8 teams – the Dallas Stars, Nashville Predators, New York Islanders, Pittsburgh Penguins, St. Louis Blues, San Jose Sharks, Tampa Bay Lightning and Washington Capitals – all won a post-season series in the 2016 Stanley Cup playoffs.

This is a list of the teams and the number of seasons since they have reached the Stanley Cup Final. This list does not include the two teams that made the 2016 Stanley Cup Finals, the San Jose Sharks and the Pittsburgh Penguins.

This is a list of the teams and the number of seasons since they have won the Stanley Cup.

This list only includes cities/regions currently hosting an NHL franchise.




