Milgram experiment

The Milgram experiment is the name for a number of controversial experiments in psychology. They were done by Stanley Milgram in the 1960s. Milgram wanted to find out if people would follow orders, even if the orders went against their conscience. He proved they would. There have been many repetitions and variations, with similar results. 

The experiments do not answer the question as to why apparently normal people commit atrocities in wartime. However, "obedience to authority" is built into the experiment, since the subjects were paid, and acting under the instructions of a senior university professor. Many were students.

Participants (acting as "teachers") gave what they thought were electric shocks to "learners". The "learners" were actually actors, and the shocks were spoof (not real). The learners reacted as if they were in real pain. As the "shocks" increased, they acted as if in very bad pain.

If at any time the subject ("teacher") wanted to stop the experiment, he was given a succession of verbal prods by the experimenter, in this order:
If the subject still wished to stop after all four successive verbal prods, the experiment was halted. Otherwise, it was halted after the subject had given the maximum "450-volt" shock three times in succession.

Milgram found that some of the "teachers" became very nervous. For example, they would laugh and be unable to control it.

Before Milgram did his experiment, he asked fourteen Yale University psychology students what they thought the results would be. On average, the students thought that 1.2% of the "teachers" would give the biggest electric shock of 450 volts. In fact, in Milgram's first set of experiments, "65 percent" (26 of 40) of participants administered the experiment's final massive 450-volt shock.

Milgram wrote about the experiment in his book "Obedience to Authority: an experimental view". It was published in 1974. Milgram's experiments have been done again by many psychologists, with very similar results.

Milgram offered two theories:

Other factors might partly explain the Milgram experiments:

The experiment has been mentioned numerous times in pop culture. In the graphic novel "V for Vendetta" Dr. Surridge said that he has lost faith in humanity because of the experiment. In 2013 there was a conference about it at Nipissing University in Canada.


