Police Academy: The Animated Series

Police Academy: The Series, also known as Police Academy: The Animated Series, is an popular 1988 American animated television series based on the "Police Academy" series of films. It aired on Saturday mornings and lasted two seasons for a total of 64 episodes.

Some episodes feature a crime boss named Kingpin. His keen intelligence, girth, and stature are very similar to the Marvel Comics character of the same name. New characters were added to the show as well. Among them were a group of talking police dogs called the Canine Corps. They were made up of Samson (the bulldog leader), Lobo (the noble yet clumsy husky), Bonehead (the dimwitted giant St. Bernard), Chilipepper (the excitable chihuahua), and Schitzy (the only female golden retriever with an identity crisis). 

The show was produced by Ruby-Spears Productions and Warner Bros. Animation. In later years, the latter company would gain distribution rights to most of the pre-1990 shows by the former, thanks to Time Warner buying Turner Entertainment (which had acquired the R-S library) in 1996.

The animated serie takes place chronologically between the fourth and fifth film of the series of films.

Twelve characters are re-created for this animated version, including a team of Academy graduates led by Carey Mahoney, a likeable rogue bachelor boy, who unconsciously—and consistently—does his best to make life miserable for Captain Harris and his knucklehead assistant Sgt. Proctor.

Mahoney's friends include the aptly named Moses Hightower, walking sound effects machine Larvell Jones, trigger-happy Eugene Tackleberry, sweet & timid Laverne Hooks, tough-as-nails Debbie Callahan, larger-than-life House, and the bread-&-butter duo of reformed gang member Zed and his best buddy, Sweetchuck.

Eric Lassard is the highly-respected (albeit dreamy) Commandant, and Academy newcomer The Professor is also on hand, and also the cadets new friends, the K-9 Corps, a group of cops dogs, and stocking our crime-fighting heroes with an endless supply of wacky gadgets as they combat a motley crew of Kingpin and other recurring villains such as Numbskull, The Claw, Mr. Sleaze, Lockjaw and Amazona.


"Police Academy" was released through chronological volumes on VHS. At least six volumes were released, each including two episodes. In 2009 on DVD with the complete series.


