Disgaea: Hour of Darkness

Disgaea: Hour of Darkness, known in Japan as , is a tactical role-playing video game made by Nippon Ichi for the PlayStation 2 game console. It was published in North America by Atlus, and in PAL regions by Koei. It was later re-released for the PlayStation Portable with extra content, and again on the Nintendo DS. It's about a demon named Laharl, another demon named Etna, and an angel named Flonne. It has two sequels called "" and "", though the characters in this game are not the main characters in those games. It's linked to a game that was out earlier called "", and later games that were made called "Phantom Brave" and "" that have "Disgaea" cameos. It has an anime called "Makai Senki Disgaea".

The game is based in a place called the Netherworld, where demons live. The game also goes outside of the Netherworld to Celestia, a place where angels live, and Earth.


"Disgaea" starts in a castle where the player controls Laharl. He or she can buy weapons, armor, accessories, and items, cure their team at a hospital, go to a place called Item World, go to a place called the Dark Assembly, or go to another place through a portal.
The main gameplay is a turn-based strategy role-playing game. The characters start from a blue portal on the level, and the player can take up to ten people out for a battle. The level is on a grid, and each character can move a certain number of spaces. The player can do many things after they are out of the portal, like attacking, defending, or throwing someone.
There are many kinds of items like weapons, armors, accessories, and help items.
There are two main kinds of character types - human-shaped characters, like Humans, Angels, and Demons who look like humans, and Monster characters, which are demons who do not look like humans.
The Item World is a world where the player can send the characters into an item. The levels in the Item World are randomly made, and at every ten floors, there's a more powerful enemy and an exit. The more floors the player goes to, the stronger the item gets. In Item World, there are also characters called Specialists. If one of the player's characters kills them, they are captured, and make the item more powerful in some ways. For example, if the player captures a Gladiator, the item boosts the attack power of who's holding it.
The Dark Assembly is a place where Laharl can go to propose a law, which include a law that gets more expensive 

The PlayStation 2 version of "Disgaea" got an award from IGN for "Best Game no one Played" in 2003.



