Mania

Mania is a type of mood. Mania is usually a symptom of a medical problem or a mental illness. A person with mania is described as manic.

When people are manic, they usually have much more energy than usual. They often have very strong emotions, and their moods may change very quickly.

The word "mania" comes from from the Greek language ("μwordsανία" means "mania"). That word comes from "μαίνομαι" ("mainomai)", which means "to rage" or "to be furious" (very angry).

Mania is a symptom, not an illness by itself. Many different things can cause mania. These things include illegal drugs and brain tumors. However, most of the time, mania happens in people with bipolar disorder. Bipolar disorder causes periods of mania that switch off with periods of depression.

Like with other symptoms, mania can be mild (not very bad), severe (very bad), or anywhere in between. Mild mania is usually called "hypomania." Very bad mania can cause psychosis, with hallucinations and delusions.

In some cases, people with mania may need to be hospitalized so they do not hurt themselves or other people. On the other hand, many people with mania and hypomania have special creativity and artistic talents.

The most common symptoms of mania are:
Other symptoms of mania can include:

In the United States, a book called "The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" (DSM), published by the American Psychiatric Association, is used to diagnose mental illnesses. According to the latest version of the DSM, the DSM-5, a person is having a "manic episode" if all of these things are true:
In addition, the person must also have three or more of these symptoms:

The ICD-10 is the World Health Organization's system for classifying health problems. It describes a manic episode this way:

Mental illness

Mania is usually a symptom of mental illness, most often bipolar disorder. A diagnosis of type I bipolar disorder (bipolar I disorder) can be made based on a single manic episode. This is the most common cause of mania.

However, if a person is hypomanic, they may have type II bipolar disorder or cyclothymia.

Also, if a person has psychosis that lasts longer than their mania, they may have schizoaffective disorder.

Medical causes

Mania is usually caused by a mental illness. However, some medical illnesses can cause symptoms of mania. Some doctors use the mnemonic E-MANIC to remember the possible medical causes of mania:

Not having enough vitamin B-12 (vitamin B-12 deficiency) can also cause mania and psychosis.

If mania is caused by a medical problem, the best thing to do is to treat that medical problem.

If mania is caused by a mental illness, the best treatment is a combination of medicines and psychotherapy (talking with a therapist or counselor).

Doctors usually treat mania with a combination of mood stabilizers and antipsychotic medicines. While taking these medicines, the patient should see their doctor regularly to be checked for side effects. 
When the symptoms of mania have ended, long-term treatment then focuses on preventative treatment. The goal of this kind of treatment is to prevent periods of mania or depression from happening. Very often, this is done using a combination of drugs and psychotherapy. Medication works best for bipolar disorder, and other mental illnesses, when it is combined with other treatments like psychotherapy.





