Delta Goodrem

Delta Lea Goodrem (born 9 November 1984) is an Australian actress and singer. Her first single, "I Don't Care", charted as high as #64 on Australia's ARIA Singles Chart in 2001. In the following year, Goodrem took up the role of a schoolgirl named Nina Tucker in the Australian soap opera "Neighbours". This helped her into becoming a well known musician.

Goodrem was diagnosed with Hodgkin's lymphoma in July 2003, for which she was treated.

Delta Goodrem released her second single "Born to Try" in 2002. It charted at #1 on the ARIA Singles Charts for one week. Her third single, "Lost Without You", was released in February 2003. It charted at #1 on the ARIA Singles Charts for two separate weeks. Her album, "Innocent Eyes", was released in March the same year. It was #1 on the charts for 29 weeks. A single of the same name ("Innocent Eyes") was later released in June, followed by the release of two more singles from the album, "Not Me, Not I" and "Predictable".

In late 2004, Goodrem released the first single, "Out of the Blue", from her second album. The album, "Mistaken Identity", was released a month later. Other singles from the album include "Mistaken Identity", "A Little Too Late" and a duet with Brian McFadden, "Almost Here".

Delta Goodrem was asked to write a song for the 2006 Commonwealth Games Opening Ceremony and perform in the event herself. The single, "Together We Are One", was released on the "Commonwealth Games: Melbourne 2006 Opening Ceremony" compilation.

In 2007, Goodrem released a single titled "In This Life". It was from her third studio album "Delta" which was released a month later. Other singles from this album include "Believe Again", "You Will Only Break My Heart" and "I Can't Break It To My Heart".

In October 2012, Delta Goodrem released her fourth studio album, "Child of the Universe". Singles from this album include "Sitting on Top of the World", "Dancing With a Broken Heart" and "Wish You Were Here".

On 1 July 2016, Delta Goodrem's fifth studio album, "Wings of the Wild" was released. Singles from this album include "Only Human", "Wings", "Dear Life" and "Enough".


