1985-86 NHL season

The 1985–86 NHL season was the 69th season of the National Hockey League. Twenty-one teams each played 80 games. This season saw the league's Board of Governors introduce the Presidents' Trophy, which would go to the team with the best overall record in the NHL regular season. The Edmonton Oilers would be the first winners of this award.

The Montreal Canadiens defeated the Calgary Flames four games to one in the final series to win the Stanley Cup.

"Note: GP = Games Played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, GF= Goals For, GA = Goals Against, Pts = Points, PIM = Penalty Minutes"

"Note: all dates in 1986"
Hartford Whalers vs. Quebec Nordiques
"Hartford wins best-of-five series 3–0"

Boston Bruins vs. Montreal Canadiens

"Montreal wins best-of-five series 3–0"

New York Rangers vs. Philadelphia Flyers

"New York Rangers wins best-of-five series 3–2"

New York Islanders vs. Washington Capitals

"Washington wins best-of-five series 3–0"

Toronto Maple Leafs vs. Chicago Black Hawks

"Toronto wins best-of-five series 3–0"

St. Louis Blues vs. Minnesota North Stars

"St. Louis wins best-of-five series 3–2"

Vancouver Canucks vs. Edmonton Oilers

"Edmonton wins best-of-five series 3–0"

Winnipeg Jets vs. Calgary Flames

"Calgary wins best-of-five series 3–0"

Hartford Whalers vs. Montreal Canadiens

"Montreal wins best-of-seven series 4–3"

New York Rangers vs. Washington Capitals

"New York Rangers wins best-of-seven series 4–2"

Toronto Maple Leafs vs. St. Louis Blues

"St. Louis wins best-of-seven series 4–3"

Calgary Flames vs. Edmonton Oilers
"Calgary wins best-of-seven series 4–3"

New York Rangers vs. Montreal Canadiens
"Montreal wins best-of-seven series 4–1"

St. Louis Blues vs. Calgary Flames
"Calgary wins best-of-seven series 4–3"

Montreal Canadiens vs. Calgary Flames
"Montreal wins best-of-seven series 4–1"

The following is a list of players of note who played their first NHL game in 1985–86 (listed with their first team, stars(*) mark start in playoffs):

The following is a list of players of note that played their last game in the NHL in 1985–86 (listed with their last team):



