Aube

Aube is a department in the northeast of France named after the Aube river. The prefecture (capital) of Marne is Troyes.

Aube is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790 with Troyes as is capital. It was divided in six districts: Nogent-sur-Seine, Arcis-sur-Aube, Bar-sur-Aube, Bar-sur-Seine, Ervy and Troyes.

In 1800, with the creation of the "arrondissements" in France, the six districts were changed into five "arrondissements": Arcis-sur-Aube, Bar-sur-Aube, Bar-sur-Seine, Nogent-sur-Seine and Troyes.

After the Battle of Waterloo (18 June 1815), the department was occupied by the Russian army from June 1815 to November 1818.

On 10 September 1926, the "arrondissements" of Arcis-sur-Aube et Bar-sur-Seine were eliminated.

The Aube department is in the Grand Est region. It is bordered by 3 regions and 5 departments:

Aube has an area of , and its highest point is in the "Bois du Mont" in the "commune" Champignol-lez-Mondeville in the southeastern part of the department; it is high (). The lowest point is high in the "commune" La Motte-Tilly in the west of the department.

The main rivers in the department are the Seine, the Aube (tributary of the Seine), the Amance (tributary of the Armançon), and the Vanne (a tributary of the Yonne).

The area around Troyes, at an altitude of about , is characterized by climates with few extremes of temperature. The Köppen climate classification type for the climate at Troyes is a "Marine West Coast Climate" and of the subtype "Cfb".

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Troyes is . The month with the most precipitation on average is November with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is July with an average of .

The average temperature for the year in Troyes is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

Aube is managed by the "General Council of Marne" in Troyes. The department is part of the Grand Est region.

There are 3 "arrondissements" (districts), 17 "cantons" and 431 "communes" (municipalities) in Aube.

The following is a list of the 17 cantons of the Aube department, following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:
The inhabitants of the Aube department are known, in French, as "Aubois" (women: "Auboises"),

Aube had a population, in 2013, of 306,581, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Troyes, with 222,726 inhabitants, is the "arrondissement" with more inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Aube

The "communes" with more inhabitants in the Aube department are:




