Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder

Attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), or attention deficit disorder (ADD), is a condition affecting the brain. It affects how people think and act. People with ADHD usually have problems with focusing and remembering what is said or done around them. They may also have extra trouble sitting still or being quiet. 

Because ADHD affects how people's nerves develop, it is called a "neurological developmental disorder". 

Experts think that throughout the entire world, about one in twenty children (5%) has ADHD. Some countries have more people with ADHD than others, and not everyone uses the same tests. Psychologists have found more people with ADHD in North America than in Africa and the Middle East. In the United States, about one in every fourteen children has ADHD (7%), including one in every ten boys (10%) and one in every twenty-five girls (4%). This could be because more boys get ADHD, or because fewer girls take ADHD tests.

ADHD is most common in children, but many adults have ADHD, too. A little less than half of children with ADHD get better when they become adults.

People with ADHD can have trouble paying attention, be overly active, or be impulsive. There are three types of ADHD, based on which of the three symptoms is most common. Someone who usually has trouble paying attention may have some or all of these symptoms:
Someone who usually is overly active may have some or all of these symptoms:
People who are overly active usually lose these symptoms as they get older.

Someone who usually is impulsive may have some or all of these symptoms:
People with ADHD may have trouble making and keeping friends. They may also have trouble controlling their anger. While children with ADHD may have trouble doing some things, many children with ADHD will not have trouble paying attention to something they enjoy or think are interesting.

Most people who have ADHD also have other mental disorders, most often oppositional defiant disorder, conduct disorder, dyslexia, Tourette syndrome, anxiety disorders (especially obsessive-compulsive disorder), mood disorders, substance use disorders, eating disorders and personality disorders (especially antisocial, borderline, histrionic, passive-aggressive and avoidant).

Research of twins has shown that about three in four cases of ADHD are caused by one or both parents having ADHD. Siblings of children with ADHD are three to four times more likely to develop the disorder than siblings of children without the disorder. Genetic factors are also believed to be involved in determining whether ADHD persists into adulthood. Some scientists think that ADHD is common because it was good to be overly active when humans were first developing. Others think that, because ADHD is more common in children when the mother is anxious, ADHD developed to help children in dangerous places.

There are other possible causes for ADHD. If a pregnant mother drink alcohol, it can cause fetal alcohol syndrome, which can include ADHD. ADHD can also occur if a mother smokes tobacco while she is pregnant. Lead, low birth weight, premature birth, and some infections can increase the risk of a child having ADHD.

There is no cure for ADHD. People with ADHD can be helped with therapy or medication. Therapy is recommended for children who do not have bad symptoms or are very young. Therapy for people with ADHD helps with attention and behavior. There is also education for parents and teachers to help children with ADHD. Some physical exercise has been shown to help people with ADHD.

The most common medication for ADHD is a stimulant. Stimulants increase the amount of a chemical called dopamine in the brain, which helps with paying attention or being overly active. These medications should not be given to young children.

People do not agree about the diagnosis of ADHD. The number of people with ADHD has increased in the last several years. Some people think this is because doctors are diagnosing too many people. Others think it is because doctors are getting better at finding people with ADHD. Some people think that ADHD is made-up and not a real illness. Most studies suggest that ADHD is mostly caused by problems with genes.

Several famous people have spoken about the rise in ADHD diagnoses. Actor Tom Cruise said that the medicines usually given to people with ADHD were like illegal drugs. Others disagreed with him because the amount of medicine given to people with ADHD does not cause addiction. There have been many studies about the effectiveness of the medicines used with ADHD. One certain study found that the medicine did help over a long time, but did not help more than other types of treatment.



