2008 Mumbai attacks

The 2008 Mumbai attacks were twelve attacks by terrorists that happened at the same time across Mumbai, India, on 26 November 2008. 172 people were killed and 293 were injured. 

A group called Deccan Mujahideen said it did all of the 2008 Mumbai attacks. Before this, nobody had heard of this group. Now, they are known to be a part of the Indian Mujahideen.

Pakistan's people are mostly Muslim, while India's people are mostly Hindu. These two religions, Islam and Hinduism, have different ideas about many things. In the past, there was a lot of conflict between India and Pakistan, partly about religion and partly about many other things.

More recently, the relationship between India and Pakistan has gotten better. Some terrorist groups in India, like Deccan Mujahideen, did not like this. They reacted by using terrorism.

Around fifty to sixty terrorists took part in the attacks. They looked young, around their early twenties, and wore T-shirts, black shirts, and jeans. "The Guardian" has said that they seemed "cool and composed" (calm) and "in no hurry". Police officers who rescued hostages at the Chabad House were surprised that the terrorists looked like they were "white" - like they were not Indian, or were from northern India. 

The terrorists had planned the attack a few months earlier. They set up "control rooms" in the two luxury hotels that were attacked.

After the attacks, a group that called itself Deccan Mujahideen sent emails to news organizations, saying they had done the attacks. "The New York Times" has said that international security experts had never heard of the Deccan Mujahideen group. One expert thought that some other terrorist group was using "Deccan Mujahideen" as a fake name. In September of 2008, the Indian Mujahideen had warned that they would be making terrorist attacks soon. Their message said that "you are already on our hit-list and this time very, very seriously."

One witness said that the gunmen were looking for people with American and British passports to kill. This witness said that the terrorists left other people, like a man who said he was Italian, alone.

"The Independent" has reported that "the attackers were young South Asian men speaking Hindi or Urdu, suggesting they are probably members of an Indian militant group rather than foreigners".



