Panic attack

Panic attacks are sudden periods of very bad anxiety. Along with feeling very scared, people with panic attacks usually have physical symptoms. These symptoms are not dangerous. However, they can make a person feel terrible for a short time. Having a panic attack is often terrifying and very upsetting. Many people who have a panic attack for the first time call 9-1-1 because they think they are having a heart attack or a nervous breakdown.

Though panic attacks make people feel terrible, they are not dangerous. Usually, the worst symptoms are over in ten minutes or less. However, some panic attacks can be as short as one to five minutes.

Panic attacks can happen in people with all kinds of mental illnesses. They can also happen in people who have no mental illness, but have just had something very bad happen to them.

The new Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM), DSM-5, describes a panic attack as:

""An abrupt [sudden] surge of intense [very strong] fear or intense discomfort that reaches a peak within minutes... [During that] time four or more of the following symptoms occur. The abrupt surge can occur from a calm state or an anxious state.""

According to DSM-5, a person is having a panic attack if they suddenly start feeling very scared and have four or more of these symptoms:

Panic attacks happen when the body's natural fight or flight response gets overprotective. Usually, the fight or flight response kicks in when a person is in danger. It tells the sympathetic nervous system to make many changes in the body. These changes will help the person fight or run away from the danger. For example:
When a person is truly in danger, these changes in the body can help the person survive. The changes in the body make it easier for the person to fight or run away from the danger.

However, when a person is having a panic attack, their body is reacting as if they are in danger, when they are really not. Their fight or flight system kicks in and causes changes to the body. But because the person does not need these changes to help them survive, the changes cause symptoms. For example:

Every symptom of a panic attack is caused by the fight or flight reaction. This is why panic attacks are not dangerous. The fight or flight system is meant to save a person's life if they are in danger. If is a natural self-defense system in the human body. When a panic attack happens, this life-saving fight or flight system is simply kicking in when it is not needed.




