Alpes-Maritimes

Alpes-Maritimes (; ) is a department of the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur region in the extreme southeast corner of France.

The name Alpes-Maritime comes from , a Roman military district created in the region by Augustus in 14 BC.

The department of the Alpes-Martimes was created on 4 February 1793 with the territory of the County of Nice that was annexed in January of the same year. The capital was Nice. It was divided in three districts: Menton, Nice and Puget-Théniers. In 1794, district of Menton was changed to district of Fort-d'Hercule (Monaco).

In 1800, with the creation of the "arrondissements" in France, the three districts were changed into three "arrondissements": Nice, Monaco and Puget-Théniers.

After the annexation of San Remo, the "arrondissement" of San Remo was created in 1805. By the Peace of Paris in 1814, San Remo passed to Genoa and the rest of the department passed to the Kingdom of Sardinia.

When Nice became part of France in 1860, the department was created again with Nice as the capital and with the "arrondisement" of Grasse that was part of Var department. In the same year, the department was divided in two "arrondissements": Grasse and Puget-Théniers.

On 10 September 1926, the "arrondissement" of Puget-Théniers was eliminated.

The Alpes-Maritimes is part of the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur region. It has an area of .

The department is surrounded by the Piedmont and Liguria regions (Italy) and two departments; the Mediterranean Sea is to the south. It surrounds the Principality of Monaco on the west, north, and east.


The highest mountain in the department is "Cime du Gélas" () on the border with Italy; it is high. The lowest point is along the Mediterranean coast.

The main rivers in Alpes-Maritimes are: Var, Vésubie, Tinée, Roya, Estéron, Siagne, Loup.

The Köppen climate classification type for the climate at Nice is a "Mediterranean climate" and of the subtype "Csb".

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Nice is . The month with the most precipitation on average is October with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is July with an average of . There are an average of 94.0 days of precipitation, with the most precipitation occurring in April with 11.0 days and the least precipitation occurring in July with 4.0 days.

The average temperature for the year in Nice is . The warmest month, on average, is August with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

Alpes-Maritimes is managed by the "Departmental Council of Alpes-Maritimes" in Nice. The department is part of the Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur region.

There are 2 "arrondissements" (districts), 27 "cantons" and 163 "communes" (municipalities) in Alpes-Maritimes.

The following is a list of the 27 cantons of the Alpes-Maritimes department, in France, following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:
The inhabitants of Alpes-Maritimes are known, in French, as "Maralpins" (women: "Maralpines").

Alpes-Maritimes had a population, in 2014, of 1,083,312, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Grasse, with 560,045 inhabitants, is the "arrondissement" with more inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Alpes-Maritimes

The "communes" in the department with more than 20,000 inhabitants are:




