Lise Simms

Elisabeth Caroline Simms (born March 17, 1963 in southern Colorado), credited as Lise Simms, is an American actress, singer, and dancer.

Lise grew up in southern Colorado. Her parents are Bill and Jacque Simms and is the sixth of nine children. Her brother, Tom Simms, is a Spanish teacher at Centennial High School. Lise graduated from Centennial High School in 1981, and from Oklahoma State University in 1985.

Lise began her acting career at age 13. She started doing Broadway after graduating from high school and starred in numerous plays such as "Other People's Money", "Mame", "Can-Can", "Sweet Charity", and "Bye Bye Birdie" during the 1980s. She was also a member of the original Los Angeles, California cast of "Beauty and the Beast" and toured around the world with "A Chorus Line" in 1986.

Simms was the host of Style Network's "Area". She had a recurring role on "Sunset Beach", but is best known for her role as "Barbara Diffy", Phil's mom in the Disney Channel original series "Phil of the Future", where she also played "The Timekeeper" in the episode "It's a Wonder-Phil Life". She had a recurring role as "Connie Wayne" in the soap opera "The Young and the Restless", and made guest appearances on "Friends", "Providence", "MADtv", "3rd Rock from the Sun", "" and many others. She performed for President Ronald Reagan in 1988's "Great Performances at the White House" series, which aired on PBS. 

Most recently, Simms can be seen as co-host and interior designer on Home & Garden Television's "Desperate Spaces". Simms works with co-host and designer Daniel Kucan to decorate a room of a home in just two days and with only $2,500. They choose 1 room from 3 deserving rooms in need. "Desperate Spaces" premiered January 1, 2008. 

Simms had a guest spot on the February 3, 2009 episode of "90210" as Ty's mother, Louise Collins.

Simms has been in commercials for the game Jenga, the remedies Tums, Maalox, Advil, Bluefly, Post Cereal's Shredded Wheat, and Dairy Queen's "Moolate" shakes. At one time, she co-hosted an infomercial for Rug Doctor carpet cleaning products. Simms also hosted a infomercial for Franklin Wheel and won an Astrid Award. She had appeared in Disney Channel's "Express Yourself" segments with other Disney Channel stars.




