Creuse

Creuse () is a department in central France in the region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine. It is named after the Creuse river that flows through the department.

Creuse is one of the 83 French departments made during the French revolution, on 4 March 1790. It was created mainly with lands of the old province of County of La Marche.

The new department had seven districts: La Souterraine, Guéret, Boussac, Évaux, Felletin, Bourganeuf and Aubusson. The capital (now prefecture) was Guéret alternating with Aubusson, but soon only Guéret remained as capital.

In 1800, with the creation of the "arrondissements" in France, the seven districts were changed into four "arrondissements": Guéret, Aubusson, Bourganeuf and Boussac.

On 10 September 1926, the "arrondissements" of Bourganeuf et Boussac were eliminated.

Creuse is part of the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region. It has an area of .

The department is surrounded by 6 departments in 3 regions:

The department is in the northwestern part of the Massif Central; the "Millevaches" plateau is in the southeastern part of the department. The highest point is in "Forêt de Châteauvert" (), "commune" of Saint-Oradoux-de-Chirouze, southeastern of the department and in northeastern Massif Central; it is high; the lowest point is in the valley of the Creuse river, high.

The main river in the department is the Creuse, a tributary of the Vienne river and that gives its name to this the deparment; it flows through the department from the southeast to the northwest.

The department is managed by the "Departamental Council of the Creuse" in Guéret. Creuse is part of the region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine.

There are 2 "arrondissements" (districts), 15 "cantons" and 258 "communes" (municipalities) in Haute-Vienne.

The following is a list of the 15 cantons of the Creuse department] (with their INSEE codes), in France, following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:
The inhabitants of Creuse are known, in French, as "Creusois" (women: "Creusoises").

Creuse has a population, in 2014, of 120,581, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Guéret, with 83,458 inhabitants, is by far the largest. The other "arrondissement", Aubusson, has 37,123 inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Dordogne

The main cities in the department are:




