Flemish Brabant

Flemish Brabant (Dutch: "Vlaams-Brabant", French: "Brabant flamand") is the youngest and smallest province of the Flemish Region, one of the three regions of Belgium. It covers the Dutch-speaking northern part of the former province of Brabant. Flemish Brabant also completely surrounds the Brussels-Capital Region, which forms an enclave within the territory of the province.

Its capital, and also the largest city of the province, is the university city of Leuven (, often used in English).

"Flemish" in "Flemish Brabant" means that it is in the Flemish part of the former province of Brabant of Belgium. "Brabant" was an old region, the Duchy of Brabant. The word "Brabant" appears for the first time in the seventh century when the abbey of Nivelles was founded in the "pagus Bracbatensis" ("pagus" is a Latin word meaning a very small town, with only few houses).

Flemish Brabant was created in 1995 by the splitting of the former province of Brabant into three parts: two new provinces, Flemish Brabant and Walloon Brabant; and the Brussels-Capital Region, which no longer belongs to any province. The split was made to accommodate the eventual division of Belgium in three regions (Flanders, Wallonia and the Brussels-Capital Region).

The province borders on (clockwise from the North) the Belgian provinces of Antwerp, Limburg, Liège, Walloon Brabant, Hainaut and East Flanders.

The province has an area of ; it is about long (east-west direction) and about wide (north-south direction).

It has a population of and a density of inhabitants per km². The province is divided into two districts ("arrondissements" in French and "arrondissementen" in Dutch) with 65 municipalities.

The main rivers of the province are the Dyle, the Demer and the Zenne.

The province of Flemish Brabant is divided into two districts: Halle-Vilvoorde has Brussels in its middle and, therefore, is mainly a residential area, but it also has large industrial zones; the other district is Leuven, centered on the city of Leuven.

Population on 1 January of each year.



