Loma de Cabrera

Loma de Cabrera is a Dominican city and municipality of the Dajabón province, on the northwestern part of the country, near the border with Haiti.

It was a small town in the Monte Cristi province that became a municipality when the Dajabón province was created in 1938.

Its Spanish name, Loma de Cabrera, means in English "Hill of Cabrera" or "Cabrera's Hill". The city and most of the municipality is among hills and its old name was Loma de David (David's Hill) but it was named after José Cabrera, one of the leaders of the Restoration War against Spain and who fought in this region.

The municipality is surrounded by municipalities of the Dajabón province: Dajabón to the north, Rstauración to the south, and El Pino and Partido to the east. To the west, Loma de Cabrera borders with [Haiti]].

The city had, in , a total population of 10,893: 5,647 men and 5,246 women. The urban population was of the total population.

Loma de Cabrera has a total area of , about of the total area of the province of Dajabón . The city is an elevation of , and at to the south of the city of Dajabón, the capital of the province.

Most of the municipality is among mountains because it is located in the northern side of the Cordillera Central ("Central mountain chain"). The highest mountains are to the south of the city; to the north, there are only low hills with small valleys.

To the north of the city there is a hill with pines that can be seen from the city because it is alone; it is the "Cerro Chacuey" (in English, Chacuey Hill).

The most important river of the municipality (and of the province) is the Dajabón River, also called Masacre River; it flows across the municipality from south to north. There are other rivers but they are very small and tributaries of the Dajabón.

The municipality of Loma de Cabrera has two municipal districts: Capotillo, to the west of the city and close to Haiti, and Santiago de la Cruz in the northern part of the municipality.

The main economic activity of the province is farming; the main products are coffee, beans and manioc.

Cattle raising for milk is also an important activity in the municipality.


