Corrèze

Corrèze () is a department in south-western France, named after the Corrèze river. It is in the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region. Its capital is the city of Tulle.

Corrèze is one of the 83 French departments made during the French revolution, on 4 March 1790. It was created from parts of the old province of Limousin (the "Bas Limousin").

The new department had four districts: Uzerche, Ussel, Tulle and Brive. The capital (now prefecture) was Tulle.

In 1800, with the creation of the "arrondissements" in France, the four districts were changed into three "arrondissements": Tulle, Brive and Ussel.

On 10 September 1926, the "arrondissement" of Ussel was eliminated but, on 6 December 1943, it became again an "arrondissement".

Corrèze is part of the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region; it is to the west of the Massif Central. It has an area of .

The department is surrounded by 6 departments in 3 regions:

The highest point of the department is the Mont Bessou, high; the lowest point is in the valley of the Vézère river and is high.

The main rivers in the department are the Dordogne, the Vézère and the Corrèze that gives its name to the deparment.

The climate in Brive-la-Gaillarde is an oceanic climate with template summers, Cfb (Marine West Coast Climate) in the Köppen climate classification.

The annual rainfall in Brive-la-Gaillarde is . The month with the most precipitation on average is October with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is February with an average of .

The average temperature for the year in Brive-la-Gaillarde is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The department is managed by the "Departmental Council of the Corrèze" in Tulle. Corrèze is part of the region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine.

There are 3 "arrondissements" (districts), 19 "cantons" and 283 "communes" (municipalities) in Corrèze.

The following is a list of the 19 cantons of the Corrèze department (with their INSEE codes), following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:

The inhabitants of Corrèze are known, in French, as "Corréziens" (women: "Corréziennes").

Corrèze has a population, in 2014, of 241,340, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Brive-la-Gaillarde, with 130,034 inhabitants, is by far the largest. The other two, Tulle and Ussel, have respectively 78,408 and 32,898 inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Corrèze

The city with more people living in it is Brive-la-Gaillarde (46,961) and not the capitalː Tulle (14,325).

The main cities in the department are:




