Eure-et-Loir

Eure-et-Loir is a department in north-central France in the Centre-Val de Loire region. It is named after the two main rivers that flow through the department: Eure and Loir.

Its prefecture is Chartres and there are three subprefectures: Châteaudun, Dreux and Nogent-le-Rotrou.

The department is one of the 83 French departments made during the French revolution, on 4 March 1790. The department was created mainly from parts of the former provinces of "Orléanais" (Beauce) and "Maine" (Perche), but also parts of the old "Île-de-France".

The new department had six districts: Chartres, Châteaudun, Châteauneuf-en-Thymerais, Dreux, Janville and Nogent-le-Rotrou. The capital (now prefecture) was Chartres.

In 1800, with the creation of the "arrondissements" in France, the six districts were changed into four "arrondissements": Chartres, Châteaudun, Dreux and Nogent-le-Rotrou.

On 10 September 1926, the "arrondissement" of Nogent-le-Rotrou was eliminated but in 1943 Nogent-le-Rotrou became again an "arrondissement" of the department.

Eure-et-Loir is part of the Centre-Val de Loire region. It has an area of .

The department is bordered by the 7 departments in 4 regions:


The highest point of the department is the "Butte de Rougemont" (), in the "commune" of Vichères, and that is above sea level.

The rivers in the department are in two watersheds:

The Köppen climate classification type for the climate at Chartres is an "Oceanic climate" (also known as Marine West Coast Climate) and of the subtype Cfb.

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Chartres is . The month with the most precipitation on average is November with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is July with an average of .

The average temperature for the year in Chartres is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The department is managed by the "Departmental Council of the Eure-et-Loir" in Chartres. Eure-et-Loir is part of the region of Centre-Val de Loire.

There are 4 "arrondissements" (districts), 15 "cantons" and 375 "communes" (municipalities) in Eure-et-Loir.

The following is a list of the 21 cantons of the Eure-et-Loir department, following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:

The inhabitants of Eure-et-Loir are known, in French, as "Euréliens" (women: "Euréliennes").

Eure-et-Loir has a population, in 2014, of 433,762, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Chartres, with 207,869 inhabitants, is by far the largest.
Evolution of the population in Eure-et-Loir

The main cities in the department are:




