Haute-Marne

Haute-Marne is a department in the northeast of France named after the Marner river. It is in the Grand Est region and its prefecture (capital) is the city of Chaumont.

Charles de Gaulle lived until his death in Colombey-les-Deux-Églises.

Haute-Marne is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790 with Chaumont as is capital. It was formed with parts of the former provinces of Champagne, Burgundy, Lorraine and Franche-Comté.

It was divided in six districts: Bourbonne, Bourmont, Chaumont, Joinville, Langres and Saint-Dizier.

In 1800, with the creation of the "arrondissements" in France, the six districts were changed into three "arrondissements": Chaumont, Langres and Wassy.

After the Battle of Waterloo (18 June 1815), the department was occupied by the Austrian army from June 1815 to November 1818.

On 10 September 1926, the "arrondissement" of Wassy was eliminated but in 1940 Wassy was made again an "arrondissement" but the subprefecture was moved to Saint-Dizier.

The Haute-Marne department is in the Grand Est region. It is bordered by 6 departments in two regions:

Haute-Marne has an area of , and its highest point is in the "Bois de Baissey" in the commune "Baissey" in the southern part of the department; it is high (), and is in the "Langres" plateau.

The main river is the Marne river; it starts in the Langres plateau and flows through in the department.

This area is characterized by climates with few extremes of temperature. The Köppen climate classification type for the climate at Saint-Dizier is a "Marine West Coast Climate" and of the subtype "Cfb".

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Saint-Dizier is . The month with the most precipitation on average is November with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is July with an average of .

The average temperature for the year in Saint-Dizier is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of 

Haute-Marne is managed by the "Departmental Council of Haute-Marne" in Chaumont. The department is part of the Grand Est region.

There are 5 "arrondissements" (districts), 23 "cantons" and 427 "communes" (municipalities) in Haute-Marne.

The following is a list of the 17 cantons of the Haute-Marne department (with their INSEE codes), following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:
The inhabitants of the Haute-Marne department are known, in French, as "Haut-Marnais" (women: "Haut-Marnaises"),

Haute-Marne had a population, in 2014, of 180,673, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Saint-Dizier, with 71,371 inhabitants, is the "arrondissement" with more inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Haute-Marne

The "communes" with more inhabitants in the Haute-Marne department are:




