School

A school is a place where people go to learn about topics like reading, writing and mathematics. In a school, one or more teachers help students to learn.

In many places around the world, all children have to go to school for a certain number of years. Learning may take place in the classroom, in outside environments or on visits to other places. Colleges and universities are places to learn for students over 17 or 18. Vocational schools teach skills people need for jobs. 

Some people attend school longer than others. This is because some jobs require more training than others. For young children, one teacher is able to teach all subjects. Teachers for older students are often specialized and they only teach a few subjects. Common subjects taught include science, arts such as music, humanities, like geography and history, and languages.

Children with mental issues which are difficult to handle are not required to go to regular schools. These children are given other ways to get schooling. There also are special schools which teach things which regular schools do not.

Graduate schools are for students who have graduated from college.

Education for all is quite modern. In England, for example, most people could not read or write, even in the 18th century. We know this because when they got married, those who could not write put an 'X' on the certificate, and someone else wrote their name. Mass education for reading and writing began in the 19th century.

Originally, in most countries, boys were taught differently and separately from girls. Some schools are for boys and some schools are for girls; they only accept boys, or girls, but not both. Long ago, most schools were run by religious denominations. That is because clerics were once almost the only people who were literate. Since there are only men in a monastery, this was often also true for the school, which only accepted boys. Going to a school also meant learning about religion. Some places still do not have schools for girls.

In many parts of the world, schools also help children learn things about life.

Pedagogy is the science of teaching children. There are different approaches to teaching. Similarly, certain schools use different approaches. There is quite a lot of disagreement about what and how students should be taught. Many countries solve this by allowing different types of school, so parents and children have some choice.



