Hurricane Boris (1996)

Hurricane Boris was a deadly storm. It was the fourth cyclone of the 1996 Pacific hurricane season, formed on June 27. During the overnight hours, the depression became Tropical Storm Boris. Shortly thereafter, Boris rapidly strengthened into a hurricane. Just as an eye began to form, Boris made landfall in Mexico with peak winds of 85 mph (140 kn/h). It rapidly weakened and dissipated on July 1. Boris caused heavy flooding in southern Mexico. Ten deaths were reported. Damage is unknown.

Boris originated from a tropical wave that moved off Africa on June 8. It passed near the Cape Verde Island with no convection. It crossed Central America on June 23. The wave was very poorly defined on satellite imagery for many days. The first signs of a circulation on satellite imagery appeared on the 26th, centered about 250 miles south of the Gulf of Tehuantepec. The system became a tropical depression on the 27th when convective banding increased around the center.

At its first advisory, it was noted that it get better organized. At that time, tropical storm warnings went up for Mexico. It was also noted the Aviation model forecast Tropical Depression Four-E to make landfall in Mexico as a weak tropical storm in 12 hours. Around that time, the forecast track was issued by the National Hurricane Center late on June 27 stating that it would receive an outflow from close by Hurricane Alma. At the same time the Ukmet model had Tropical Depression Four-E remaining offshore Mexico. The same model also had the depression becoming Tropical Storm Boris. The National Hurricane Center forcasted Tropical Depression Four-E to become Tropical Storm Boris and make landfall in Mexico with winds of . In the same advisory, it was noted that the outer rain bands of brand new Tropical Depression Four-E had moved onshore Mexico.

The tropical cyclone moved northwestward at 8 to 10 knots for the next two days and strengthened from 25 knots to 80 knots during a 36-hour period, with a ragged eye appearing on satellite imagery just before landfall on the afternoon of June 29 at a peak intensity of , making Boris a moderate Category 1 hurricane. The center crossed the south coast of Mexico midway between Lazaro Cardenas and Acapulco. Boris quickly weakened to a depression and turned southwestward in response to a building ridge to its north. The system was disrupted by the mountainous terrain of Mexico and dissipated on the July 1 after moving back over water just south of Puerta Vallarta.

Hurricane Boris was, in general, a well-forecast storm. Due to the short time when the system was at or above tropical storm intensity, long-range forecasts were not verified. The average errors were at one and a half days in the future. As Hurricane Boris was approaching Mexico, a tropical storm watch was issued for the coast between Manzanillo and Puerto Escondido on June 28. From Manzanillo to Puerto Maldonado, the tropical storm replaced with a hurricane warning the same day.

Boris caused ten deaths.



