Lot-et-Garonne

Lot-et-Garonne () is a department in the southwest of France named after the Lot and Garonne rivers.

Lot-et-Garonne was formed during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790 with parts of the old provinces of Guyenne and Gascony. It was divided into nine districts: Agen, Nérac, Marmande, Tonneins, Villeneuve, Lauzun, Monflanquin, Casteljaloux and Valence. 

Agen and Aiguillon were alternatively the capital of the department but in 1791 it was decided that only Agen would be the capital.

Several of the original southeastern cantons in the arrondissements of Agen and Villeneuve-sur-Lot were separated from it in 1808 to become a part of the newly created department of Tarn-et-Garonne.

Lot-et-Garonne is part of the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region, southwestern France, with an area of .

The departement is surrounded by two regions and six departments:

The main rivers in the Lot-et-Garonne are the Garonne river that flows through the south central part of the department, and the Lot river that flows through the northern regions of the department before joining, as a right tributary, the Garonne near the Aiguillon "commune".

Other river is the Baïse, a left tributary of the Garonne.

In the west of the department, mainly in the arrondissement of Nérac, there is a forest of maritime pine like in the Landes department.

The climate of Estillac, where is the Agen La Garenne Airport, is Marine West Coast Climate (Köppen climate classification Cfb), with mild winters and warm summers.

The average temperature for the year in Estillac is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Estillac is . The month with the most precipitation on average is December with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is April with an average of .

The department is managed by the "Departamental Council of Lot-et-Garonne" in Agen. Lot-et-Garonne is part of the region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine.

There are 4 "arrondissements" (districts), 21 "cantons" and 319 "communes" (municipalities) in Lot-et-Garonne.

The following is a list of the 21 cantons of the Lot-et-Garonne department (with their INSEE codes), following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:

The inhabitants of Lot-et-Garonne are known, in French, as "Lot-et-Garonnais" (women: "Lot-et-Garonnaises").

The department of Lot-et-Garonne has a population, in 2014, of 333,234, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Agen, with 120,235 inhabitants, is by far the largest. The other three, Marmande, Villeneuve-sur-Lot and Nérac, have respectively 83,245, 90,527 and 39,227 inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Lot-et-Garonne

The 10 main cities in the department are:




