E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial

E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial is a 1982 American science fiction movie. It was directed by Steven Spielberg and written by Melissa Mathison. It tells the story of Elliott, a lonely boy who makes friends with an extraterrestrial, called "E.T.", who is stranded on Earth. Elliott and his siblings help the extraterrestrial return home. They have to keep it hidden from their mother and the government.

"E.T." was a very popular movie. It did better than "". The movie became the highest-grossing movie of all time, a record it held for ten years.


Having worked with Cary Guffey on "Close Encounters of the Third Kind", Spielberg felt confident in working with a cast of mostly child actors. 

The major voice work for E.T. was Pat Welsh, an elderly woman who lived in Marin County, California. Welsh smoked two packets of cigarettes a day, which gave her voice a quality that sound effects creator Ben Burtt liked. Burtt also recorded 16 other people and various animals to create E.T.'s "voice". These included Spielberg; Debra Winger; Burtt's sleeping wife, who had a cold; a burp from his USC movie professor; and raccoons, sea otters, and horses.

Doctors working at the USC Medical Center were recruited to play the doctors who try to save E.T. Spielberg felt that actors in the roles, performing lines of medical talking, would come across as unnatural. 

The movie was first shown at the closing gala of the 1982 Cannes Film Festival. It started in the United States on June 11, 1982. It opened at number one with a gross of $11 million. The movie was re-released in 1985 and 2002.

On September 17, 1982, the movie was shown at the United Nations, and Spielberg received the U.N. Peace Medal.

The movie was nominated for nine Oscars at the 55th Academy Awards, including Best Picture. It won four Academy Awards: Best Original Score, Best Sound, Best Sound Effects Editing, and Best Visual Effects. At the Golden Globes, the movie won Best Picture in the Drama category and Best Score; it was also nominated for Best Director, Best Screenplay, and Best New Male Star for Henry Thomas. The Los Angeles Film Critics Association awarded the movie Best Picture, Best Director, and a "New Generation Award" for Melissa Mathison. The movie won Saturn Awards for Best Science Fiction Film, Best Writing, Best Special Effects, Best Music, and Best Poster Art, while Henry Thomas, Robert McNaughton, and Drew Barrymore won Young Artist Awards. Composer John Williams won a Grammy and a BAFTA for the score. It was nominated for a BAFTA Award for Best Screenplay.

In 1994, "E.T." was selected to keep in the U.S. National Film Registry.



