Boohbah

Boohbah is a British children's television programme. It was produced by Ragdoll Productions. It was made by Anne Wood. Alan Dapre and Robin Stevens wrote the scripts. Wood also made "Teletubbies".

The programme was made for preschool children between three and six years old. It is mainly intended to be an exercise show. It is also meant to be silly, and to get children thinking. The show is similar to "Teletubbies" in that both have a science fiction theme. The Boohbahs are five furry round creatures. They are meant to be atoms of energy.

There are 104 episodes in total. Each episode runs for 25 minutes. In the United Kingdom, the programme started on 14 April 2003 on ITV. It was divided into two series of 52 episodes each. The second series began on 16 March 2004.

In the United States, the programme started on 5 January 2004 on PBS. All 104 episodes were shown as one series in the U.S. The last episode was shown on 2 July 2006. Boohbah is also shown in the Netherlands on Nick Jr. "Boohbah" means "doll" in Hebrew, but it is not known if the show was named for this.

The series focuses on the Boohbahs: five plump, fuzzy, furry, round, gumdrop-shaped creatures. They are played by actors in full body costumes. Their on sparkles and shimmers with tiny lights that have big eyes. Their eyebrows are rows of lights. They do not speak; instead, they make noises such as squeaks, squeals, "poofs", and clicks. Each Boohbah is a different color.

A list of the Boohbahs is available below.

The Storypeople are a group of characters who live in Storyland. They are in short stories. They are:


They do not speak. (When Little Dog Fido appears, he gives an "arf!") Though they sometimes show frustration or confusion, the Storypeople rarely, if ever,look upset or sad. The Storyland segments are narrated by actor Chris Langham. In each episode the Storypeople magically receive an object sent to them by a child or group of children.

One of the common things in "Boohbah" is the Boohball. The Boohball, a glowing white ball, is where the Boohbahs live, and it appears out of nowhere in various parts of the show. It travels from country to country when it is called by children. Inside the Boohball is a spinning recharging pod, where the Boohbahs recharge energy. It looks like five deep spoons with the handles linked. One could also say that the hammocks look like five fig halves. The energy is created by the laughter of the children when playing with the Boohbahs, the Boohball, and the Storypeople.



