Animal Crossing: City Folk

Animal Crossing: City Folk is a life simulation video game made by Nintendo for the Wii game console. It is the third game in the "Animal Crossing" series. It has online play, and supports an accessory called Wii Speak. In Europe this game is called Animal Crossing: Lets Go to the city

The game takes place in a small village. The player can also work with other animal villagers by talking and playing with them. They can also visit a store owned by Tom Nook for food or clothes. One other thing the player can do is visit a museum to donate fishes, bugs, and fossils. The player may ride a bus to go to the city, which is a new feature to the New Animal Crossing Games. There, other activities will include shopping at a fashion clothing store called GracieGrace, a Theatre called the Marquee, which allows you to learn how to do new emotion faces, an office for the "Happy Room Academy" (a place that gives you tips on how to design the house that the player has in the game), a "black market" owned by a fox named Redd, a salon called Shampoodle, and a shop owned by Katrina, a fortune teller.

Tom Nook runs your village shop which gradually grows to make it into a supreme shop where he works with Timmy and Tommy and has a two story building. From Tom Nooks shop you can buy wallpaper, carpets, roof paint (to change your roof's colour), furniture, tools (such as fishing rods, nets, axes and spades), writing paper and seeds. Tom Nook will buy your unwanted stuff as well. Tom is also in charge of house expansions, making your house bigger.

This is where you can get local handmade clothes, umbrellas, hats, glasses and also design your own "Pro designs" Which is where your front, back and sleeves can all be different however you can no longer sell your old not wanted clothes you have to sell them to Tom Nook.

This is the shop where you can buy limited edition furniture, clothing, hats, glasses and umbrellas. Its in the city. Stuff in GracieGrace is more expensive than in Tom Nooks and in Able Sisters, but after all this stuff is limited edition.

This is a small black market where you can buy furniture and paintings once you have become a member. Its not recommended to shop there other than to buy paintings as the same Item in Tom Nooks will usually be cheaper than at Crazy Redds. Somebody else in your town must recommend you for you to become a member of Crazy Redds Shop. Crazy Redds black market can be found in the city.

Here you can get a new hair style or even a complete make over to turn you into a mii character saved on your Wii! Also in the city.

Here you Mil find llyoid who will happly put you stuff up for Auction if you want him too. your Nintendo WI-FI friends can then buy your stuff and you will get the cash that they payed for it. If it doesn't sell then you get your item sent back to you.

There are over 100 different characters that you can get as residents in your town. They will move in and then after a while move back out again to go to a different town. 

"Animal Crossing: City Folk" won awards for being one of the best games of E3.


