Child pornography

Child pornography is material showing children in erotic poses or having sex. It is usually graphic material in the form of drawings, photographs or video, but can be in writing as well. Child pornography that involves real children is a record of child sexual abuse.

Usually, these children are shown or described as being in different stages of undress, with some clothes off, or completely naked.

Child sexual abuse happens in different ways in the making of child pornography, with the most critical way being the actual molestation. Another way is that, when the act is captured with a camera it makes the abuse worse for the child,
just knowing that the event is being recorded for possible future abuse – including extortion (blackmailing) and sharing, out of the victim's control. Linked to that is many of the reasons to why that recording is then – in itself – seen as abuse. One important part of those reasons, is that the recording makes the abuse possible to go on even longer than the direct damage upon the child,
and with the Internet it may very well be seen as permanent. This makes the impact on the child even larger, not knowing – but surely worrying about – how the images might be used.

In both common usage and for the purpose of research (looking up information), the word "child" in the phrase "child pornography" refers to children before they reach puberty, and does not refer to post-puberty teenagers. For practical reasons, the way the law describes child pornography generally refer to a wider age range, including any pornography involving a minor, according to where the law applies. Most people who own child pornography who are arrested are found to own images of children who have not started puberty; owners of pornographic images of post-puberty minors are less likely to be prosecuted, even though those images also fall within the laws.

Child pornography is a multibillion-dollar industry and among the fastest growing crime activities on the Internet, according to the US The National Center for Missing and Exploited Children (NCMEC), the International Centre for Missing & Exploited Children (ICMEC) and other international sources. According to the NCMEC, almost one fifth of all Internet pornography is child pornography. New technology such as inexpensive digital cameras and sending across the internet, such as file sharing, has made it easier than ever before to produce and pass out child pornography. The people who make child pornography try to avoid prosecution by sending their material across borders with other countries, though this issue is being dealt with more and more with regular arrests of suspects from a number of countries happening over the last few years.

Child pornography is looked at and collected by pedophiles for a number of purposes, ranging from private sexual uses, exchanging with other pedophiles, preparing children for sexual abuse as part of the process known as "grooming", or for bribing victims into making more child pornography or going into child prostitution.


