Hautes-Pyrénées

Hautes-Pyrénées () is a department in the southwest of France. It is part of the Occitanie region and its main city is Tarbes.

Hautes-Pyrénées is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790. It was created with parts of the former province of Gascony; these parts were the old province of Bigorre and the Pays des Quatre-Vallées.

Hautes-Pyrénées has an area of , or 0.81% of the country. It is part of the Occitanie region and has two small territorial exclaves—a remnant from the Middle Ages—located within the neighboring "département" of Pyrénées-Atlantiques.

The department is surrounded by 2 regions and 3 departments:

and by Spain (the province of Huesca) to the south.

Three natural regions can be distinguished in the department.

The Pyrénées, along the border with Spain, cover the southern half of the department, with 66% of the department. They form a natural barrier between France and Spain. More than 30 mountains here are over high.

The Pic Vignemale (), at , is the highest point of the department; it is on the border with Spain. The Vignemale is in the Pyrénées National Park.

The second region of the Hautes-Pyrénées, with 17% of the territory, consists of chains low hills.

The third region, in the northern part of the department, is the plain of the Adour river and consists of largely flat agricultural land.

The main river of the department is the Adour river that flows through the cities of Tarbes and Bagnères-de-Bigorre. Other rivers are the Gave de Pau and the Neste.

Hautes-Pyrénées has two small territorial exclaves—a remnant from the Middle Ages—within the neighboring "département" of Pyrénées-Atlantiques.

The climate of the department is an oceanic climate with relatively hot summers, mild winters and abundant rainfall, Cfb in the Köppen climate classification.

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Lourdes is . The month with the most precipitation on average is November with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is July with an average of .

The average temperature for the year in Lourdes is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The département is managed by the "Departamental Council of the Haute-Garonne" in Tarbes. The Hautes-Pyrénées is part of the region of Occitanie.

There are 3 "arrondissements" (districts), 17 "cantons" and 472 "communes" (municipalities) in the Hautes-Pyrénées.

The following is a list of the 17 cantons of the Hautes-Pyrénées department, following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:

The inhabitants of Hautes-Pyrénées are known, in French, as "Haut-Pyrénéens" (women: "Haut-Pyrénéennes"). They are also known as the "Bigourdans".

Hautes-Pyrénées has a population, in 2014, of 228,950, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Tarbes, with 143,753 inhabitants, is by far the largest. The other two, Argelès-Gazost and Bagnères-de-Bigorre, have respectively 38,813 and 46,384 inhabitants.

The city with more people living in it is the capital, Tarbes (40,900), followed by Lourdes (14,361). The subprefectures of Argelès-Gazost and Bagnères-de-Bigorre have, respectively, 3,020 and 7,602 inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Hautes-Pyrénées

The cities with more than 4,000 inhabitants in the department are:




