Mont-de-Marsan

Mont-de-Marsan is a commune in southwestern France, in the region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine. It is the "prefecture" (capital) of the Landes department. and the capital of the "arrondissement" of Mont-de-Marsan. It is also the capital of 2 "cantons" in the department: Mont-de-Marsan-1 and Mont-de-Marsan-2.

Mont-de-Marsan is at the confluence of two rivers, the Douze and the Midou, forming the river Midouze just in the centre of the city.

It has an area of , and its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is .

Mont-de-Marsan is surrounded by the "communes" Uchacq-et-Parentis, Saint-Avit, Mazerolles, Bretagne-de-Marsan, Saint-Pierre-du-Mont and Campet-et-Lamolère.

The climate of Mont-de-Marsan is Marine West Coast Climate (Köppen climate classification: Cfb), with mild winters and warm summers.

The average temperature for the year in Mont-de-Marsan is 13.5°C (56.3°F). The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of 21.4°C (70.5 °F). The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of 6.2°C (43.2°F).

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Mont-de-Marsan is . The month with the most precipitation on average is October with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is August with an average of .

The inhabitants of Mont-de-Marsan are known, in French, as "Montois" (women: "Montoises").

With a population of 31,009, Mont-de-Marsan has a population density of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Mont-de-Marsan

Mont-de-Marsan forms, together with Saint-Pierre-du-Mont, the urban area of Mont-de-Marsan with a population of 40,671 inhabitants (2013) and an area of . This urban area is the centre of the metropolitan area of Mont-de-Marsan, formed by 47 "communes", with a population of 70,724 inhabitants (2013) and an area of .

Mont-de-Marsan is the "prefecture" of the Landes department since 1790. It is also the capital of the "arrondissement" of Mont-de-Marsan and the administrative centre () of two "cantons":

Mont-de-Marsan is twinned with:







