Apollo 11

Apollo 11 was the first flight to send people to the moon. It was done by NASA, the American space group. 
It went up to space on July 16, 1969, carrying three astronauts: Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins. On July 20, 1969, Armstrong and Aldrin became the first humans to land on the moon, while Collins stayed in orbit around the Moon. 

The flight was part of the Space Race. It finished the plan set by John F. Kennedy in 1961 to "land a man on the moon, and return him safely to the Earth", before the 1960s ended.

Millions of people around the world viewed the flight of Apollo 11 on television. When the rocket was sent to space it was a world-wide event. Richard Nixon, who was then President, watched the from the White House as the rocket went up. A Saturn V rocket took flight from the Kennedy Space Center in America. 

About two hours after leaving Earth the bit with the people in it went away from the main rocket. The bit with the people in it had two parts, the Lunar command module called "Columbia" and the Apollo Lunar Module called "Eagle". "Columbia" was the moon control space ship and "Eagle" was the moon-landing space ship. 3 days later the team entered Lunar Orbit (orbit around the moon). A day later the "Eagle" went away from "Columbia". The "Eagle" landed safely on the moon with Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin inside. During the landing there were several problems with the computer. To land safely Armstrong had to fly the "Eagle" himself. They landed with only 25 seconds of fuel left.

The first thing Buzz Aldrin did upon touch down was to pray. He also read some words of Jesus Christ. He did not reveal his plan to do this because someone had just made a lawsuit to stop astronauts from doing religious things in space. Armstrong became the first human to walk and speak on the moon's surface. The first words he said were:

For the next two and a half hours Aldrin and Armstrong took notes, pictures and made holes to get moon rock. The landings were watched by over six million people on Earth using the very big radio telescope in Australia. They did many experiments like the collecting of moon rocks and dust. An American flag was set up and photographed on the moon. 

After finishing their work, Armstrong and Aldrin returned to the "Eagle" and slept for seven hours before starting to leave. While preparing to leave, Aldrin broke the circuit breaker in the engine starter. Armstrong used a pen to bridge the circuit and stop them from being stuck on the moon. Aldrin and Armstrong left many things on the moon: an American flag, a few experiments and a sign with a message from the human race. The sign read 
"Here Men From The Planet Earth First Set Foot Upon the Moon, July 1969 A.D. We Came in Peace For All Mankind."

On July 24 the people returned to Earth and were immediately placed into quarantine (kept away from other people), in case they brought back some disease from the moon.

The three people stayed in quarantine for three weeks. When they got out they were heroes around the world. They had dinner with President Nixon, a parade in Mexico City and another one in Washington. The three were also on many television shows. 




