The Lonely Island

The Lonely Island is an American comedy group made of three people. The people are Andy Samberg, Jorma Taccone, and Akiva Schaffer. They are from Berkeley, California, but are now based in New York City. They work for "Saturday Night Live". They are known for songs such as "I'm On A Boat", "Like a Boss", "Jizz in My Pants", "Dick in a Box", and "Lazy Sunday". They have three albums called "Incredibad", "Turtleneck and Chain and The Wack Album." 

The three members of the Lonely Island (Andy Samberg, Akiva Schaffer, and Jorma Taccone) all grew up in Berkeley, California, and met in junior high school. The three friends moved to Los Angeles and rented an apartment, which they called the Lonely Island.

With increasing recognition, the trio was invited to write parts of the 2005 MTV Movie Awards, which Jimmy Fallon was hosting. Impressed with their material, he brought them to the attention of Lorne Michaels, the producer of "Saturday Night Live", who agreed to see them. Samberg auditioned for the show. He was the only member of TLI who had also been doing stand-up comedy in his free time He was called back for a second audition a few weeks later and was invited to be a cast member; Schaffer and Taccone were invited to join the writing staff based on their work in the trio. Since their arrival on "SNL", the group has written some of the most popular bits in recent "SNL" history, most notably, the "SNL" Digital Shorts. 
The group also made the skit "MacGruber", in which Will Forte plays a MacGyver parody as the main character. In every episode, MacGruber is trapped with his helpers, played by Kristen Wiig (originally Maya Rudolph) and a third person, usually the episode's host and occasionally Richard Dean Anderson as MacGyver, in a room with a bomb that is about to explode. MacGruber starts asking for simple objects to make something to stop the bomb, but he is later distracted by something (usually involving his personal life) that makes him run out of time. Every skit ends with the bomb and place where they are in exploding. All of the skits are directed by Taccone (except for 2 episodes which were directed by writer John Solomon). 

The Lonely Island released their first album, "Incredibad", on February 10, 2009, on Universal Republic Records. Many of the songs on the album debuted on "Saturday Night Live" as SNL Digital Shorts. The album also includes a DVD featuring some of the digital shorts. 

Collaborators on the album include T-Pain, Norah Jones, Jack Black, E-40, Julian Casablancas of The Strokes, Sly & Robbie, DJ Nu-Mark, J-Zone, Natalie Portman, Chris Parnell, and Justin Timberlake. 


