The X Factor (UK)

The X Factor is a British television programme, in which ordinary people who want to be singers compete for a recording contract and a cash prize. It is shown from August-December each year on Saturdays and Sundays on the channel ITV.

The show started being presented by Kate Thornton, but she left in Series 3 (2006.) Ben Shephard was hoping to present, but w
his offer was turned down. Instead, Dermot O'Leary took over in Series 4 (2007) and presented for 8 series, until his departure from the show in Series 10. Olly Murs and Caroline Flack became the first duo to host the show, but only lasted one series, mainly because they were very unpopular with the public. Surprisingly, Dermot O'Leary is returning to present the X Factor for its 13th series.

There have been either three (series 1-3) or four (4-present) judges on the X Factor UK. The show was created by Simon Cowell, who, along with Sharon Osbourne and Louis Walsh, were judges in the first three series. In 2007, Dannii Minogue joined the panel, to 'bring some youth to the panel.' However, Sharon Osbourne announced her leave at the end of the series. She was replaced by Cheryl Cole in Series 5. In 2010, Dannii and Cheryl both quit, although Cheryl later became a judge on the X Factor USA. Simon Cowell also left in order to focus on the X Factor USA. Gary Barlow replaced Simon and became head judge. Kelly Rowland and Tulisa Contostavlos (better known as just Tulisa) also joined Louis and Gary. Kelly only stayed for a year, and was replaced by Nicole Scherzinger in Series 8. Tulisa was fired at the end of Series 8, being replaced by Sharon Osbourne, who made a return for one series only. She, Gary and Nicole all announced their leave at the end of the series. Following the axing of X Factor USA, Simon Cowell returned to the show for Series 11. Cheryl Cole also returned, and Mel B joined the show as a replacement for Nicole. Mel and Louis both quit at the end of the series, and were replaced by Rita Ora and Nick Grimshaw. As far as series 13 goes, only Simon Cowell is returning to the show, as Cheryl, Rita and Nick have all left the show.

The Xtra Factor is the spin-off show of the X Factor UK. It is broadcast on British Television channel ITV2. The hosts of the spin-off are well known for hosting for short periods of time. The first Xtra Factor host was Ben Shephard, and he quit in Series 3, because his offer of being the main presenter (after Kate Thornton's departure) was turned down by the show's producers. Fearne Cotton then hosted for the fourth series. Holly Willoughby, Cotton's close friend, replaced her during the following two series, but was replaced by Blue Peter former presenter, Konnie Huq in 2010, however, Konnie lasted only one series. Olly Murs and Caroline Flack became the first duo to host the Xtra Factor in Series 8, and they presented together for two seasons. Olly then left in order to focus on his music career. He was replaced by Matt Richardson, but then Caroline and Matt announced their leave. Sarah-Jane Crawford hosted for only the 11th season. The Saturdays singer Rochelle Humes teamed up with Melvin Odoom to present the Xtra Factor's twelfth season. It is yet unknown as to if they will return for 2016. 


