2009 Atlantic hurricane season

The 2009 Atlantic hurricane season was a time period of 2009 when tropical cyclones were likely form in the Atlantic Ocean. The season started on June 1, 2009 and it ended on November 30, 2009. In this season Tropical Depression One formed early, on May 28. In June and July there were no storms. The most recent occurrence of no storms in June or July was in 1992. In total there were 2 tropical depressions, 7 tropical storms, 3 hurricanes, and two of the three were major hurricanes.

On May 28, a small storm formed off the coast of North Carolina and became a tropical depression, called "One" by the National Hurricane Center. The National Hurricane Center said that Tropical Depression One might strengthen into a tropical storm, but it did not because the water was cold and did not give enough energy to the storm. It weakened and stopped being a depression the next day.
Tropical Depression Two formed on August 11 south of Cape Verde. The system moved west and dissipated on August 13. On August 15 the remains of Tropical Depression Two reformed. Tropical Depression Two quickly strengthened into Tropical Storm Ana. The storm continued west towards the Leeward Islands. A few days later as the storm was still headed for the Leeward Islands it weakened to a tropical depression. Ana struck Dominica on August 16 and dissipated the next day.
On August 15, Tropical Depression Three formed and quickly strengthened into Tropical Storm Bill. On August 17 Tropical Storm Bill became Hurricane Bill. On August 18 Hurricane Bill became a major hurricane (Category 3+). Hurricane Bill quickly strengthened into a category 4 hurricane on August 19, but weakened back on to a category 3 on August 20. Hurricane Bill weakened to a category 2 on August 21, it again weakened the next day to a category 1 hurricane. As a category one hurricane Bill came close to a landfall in Nova Scotia. Near midnight (Eastern Time Zone) on August 23, Bill made landfall in Newfoundland and became extratropical the next day. The remains affected United Kingdom.

Tropical Storm Claudette formed in the Gulf of Mexico as Tropical Depression Four early on August 16. At 12:15 p.m. EDT the same day, it strengthened into Tropical Storm Claudette. Early the next morning Claudette struck Santa Rosa Island, Florida. Tropical Storm Claudette weakened and dissipated on August 18.
Tropical Storm Danny formed north of Puerto Rico on August 26. Danny top winds were at 60 mph. Danny did not become a hurricane. Danny instead, moved toward North Carolina as a weak tropical storm. On August 29 Danny weaken into a depression and lost it clouds to an extratropical storm. Danny did not reach North Carolina before losing its cloud. Danny killed a boy in North Carolina due to rip currents.
Tropical Storm Erika formed on September 1 as Tropical Storm Erika, meaning it was never a tropical depression. Tropical Storm Erika moved mostly west for most of the lifespan of it. On September 2 Tropical Storm Erika made landfall in Guadeloupe. Tropical Storm Erika weaken to a tropical depression and a remnant low on September 3. The remnant low caused some rain to some of the northern islands of the Caribbean Sea.

Tropical Depression Seven formed on September 7 south of the Cape Verde Islands. Later on September 7 it became a tropical storm and was named Fred. Early the next day, Tropical Storm Fred became Hurricane Fred, the second hurricane of the season. Hurricane Fred became a major hurricane (Cat 3+). Fred slowly weakened after becoming a category 3 hurricane. On September 12 while a tropical storm, Fred became a remnant low and is no longer a tropical storm.
Tropical Depression Eight formed near Cape Verde on September 25. Tropical Depression Eight was said that it would become a tropical storm, this did not happen. Tropical Depression Eight instead became a tropical wave on September 26. It is no longer a tropical depression.

Tropical Storm Grace became a tropical storm late on October 4, it was also never a tropical depression while it was forming. Tropical Storm Grace moved towards Ireland, but went into a frontal system on October 5, Grace was not a tropical storm anymore. The remains affect Ireland and the United Kingdom.

Tropical Storm Henri was a weak storm that stayed out in the ocean for most of its life. It formed from a tropical wave on October 6 while moving northwest across the Atlantic. On the next day, wind shear around the storm caused it to weaken into a remnant low. Its remains were last seen near Cuba. The storm did not come close to any land and did not cause any damage to property.
On November 4, Tropical Depression Eleven started in the Caribbean Sea. Later that same day it became a tropical storm and was given the name "Ida". Ida became a hurricane just before landfall on November 5. Ida weakened fast over land and was a depression before the end of the day. On November 6, Ida came back into the Caribbean Sea just north of Honduras. Ida became a tropical storm again on November 7. Ida later on became a hurricane again and weakened back to a tropical storm on November 9. Ida made landfall in Alabama on November 10. The storm died only about 4 hours later. The remains of Ida became a nor'easter that killed 9 people. Hurricane Ida also caused about $5.6 million in damage.
The following names will be used for named storms that form in the North Atlantic in 2009. This is the same list that was used in the 2003 season, except for "Fred", "Ida", and "Joaquin". In 2003 those three names were Fabian, Isabel, and Juan, because they were bad storms in 2003, their names were retired from the list of names.




