Bret Hart

Bret Hart (born July 2, 1957) is a semi-retired Canadian professional wrestler, writer, and actor. He is a member of the well-known Hart wrestling family of Calgary, Alberta. He is considered to be one of the most technically sound wrestlers ever. His athletic ability and in-ring knowledge have also been highly praised.

Bret Hart had an amazing career in the WWF, having some of the greatest matches of all time. Some of his best matches were against Mr. Perfect, his one-time brother-in-law British Bulldog, his brother Owen Hart, Stone Cold Steve Austin and Shawn Michaels.

Hart said that he was going to leave the WWF for the companies then biggest competitor, World Championship Wrestling (WCW) and he refused to lose the title in front of his Canadian fans to Michaels. During Survivor Series 1997 in Montreal, Quebec, a real-life screwjob took place when Shawn Michaels put Hart in Hart's own finishing move, the Sharp Shooter. Vince McMahon ordered referee Earl Hebner to call for the bell even though Hart didn't submit. This made Michaels become the WWF Champion. This incident would later become known as the Montreal Screwjob.

Hart retired after being kicked in the head by his opponent, Goldberg, in a match. Soon after he suffered a stroke. He has since partially recovered and has done some stage acting. He wrote a column for The Calgary Sun until 2004.

On January 4 2010, Hart returned to the WWE to be a special guest host for Raw. This was the first time that Hart made a live appearance on Raw in over 12 years. During the night he and Shawn Michaels agreed to a truce, shook hands and hugged. Many fans didn't know if it was real or not but Hart and Michaels later said that their truce was real and not part of a storyline. He also shook hands with Vince but Vince later kicked Hart in the gut which was part of a storyline. Hart along with his family beat Vince McMahon at WrestleMania XXVI in a No Holds Barred Match.










DVD (2006) 

Bret Hart got married 4 times his first wife was Julie humington - he married her in his early life and had 4 children then they got divorced 1994 early , bret stayed out of movement for a while then he got back again later to the lights after absence for sometime , late 1994 bret hart had secret affair with Tammy sytch a.k.a sunny , meanwhile HBK Shawn Michaels was in a secret affair also with sunny at the same time .. As for their reputation HBK broke his relationship with sunny that didn't last about a month and bret hart knew she had affair at the same time with HBK though that she was in love with HBK but messing around with bret , early 1995 bret hart got closer to the official commenator piver " the original diva " Nora Greenwald a.k.a " Molly Holly " that was well known as the official WWF diva , that was known that HBK is in love with her and bret hart was flirting trying to get away to her , she was known as she can get any man she want due to her young age but bret hart liked her , since then he had a real personal beef with HBK over the girl that Shawn Michaels turned it personal and kept on mentioning sunny days & chicks pick as a plororouning over bret hart for a while , bret hart second wife was Glen Happen 1999 to 2004 , then he married Andrea Collin 2005-2009 , then his last wife is Jasmine Brooks 2009 till now , bret hart have 6 grandsons.



