Bop It

Bop It is a series of toys made by Hasbro They are audio games. The aim of the game is to respond quickly to the commands that are produced through the game's speakers. There are several responses, including pull handles, twisting cranks, spin-able wheels, toggle switches. Each command requires a different response. A beat is played during the game and the beat will get faster as the player scores more points. "Bop It" has been very popular as a children's game. 

The game was designed by Dan Klistner. The design was developed by several Hasbro designers, including Bob Welch. There have been several versions. The original version was released in 1996. The current classic version was released in 2008. It was demonstrated at the London Toy Fair in 2009.

Since 2008 when Hasbro re-made the toy, the voice in the games has been Buddy Rubino. He has recorded the voice for "Bop It!", "Bop It! XT", "Bop It! Smash!, Bop It! Tetris and Bop It! with 10 New Moves."

In 2015, Hasbro managed to make a Bop It that can detect when it's batteries need replacing. When one of the three batteries are running low, the electronic device will play a sound clip that has been edited at the recording studio to make the game sound like it's running low on batteries. So now the voice will say "My batteries are running low." and will talk slower towards the end of the audio file and automatically shut off the game as a prompt for the user to change the batteries.

To ensure that the Bop It game is working correctly, Hasbro adds a hidden mode into the electornic unit which allows the manufacturer to test the speaker and the moving parts of the game. Each moving part has a button inside the electronic unit that when multiple buttons are pressed and the game unit's power is reset, the game will enter it's manufacturer test mode and play sounds in a certain order. Newer versions of Bop It will produce a loud beep before playing sounds. 



"Zing It" is a yo-yo version of "Bop It". It tells commands that the player must follow along with. Like the original "Bop It", there are three commands that may be said: "Bop it!" (requiring the player to press the purple button), "Zing it!" (requiring the player to drop the yo-yo downward and send it back up again), and "Loop it!" (requiring the player to do the "'round the world" yo-yo trick). "Zing It" has 3 modes: "Vox Bop" (as with Bop It), "Beat Bop" (again, as with Bop It), and "Vox Bop Challenge" (where the game will tell a series of commands which must be done in correctly). As with "Bop It" and "Bop It Extreme", "Zing It" announces the score musically by sound effects. Different tones represent different point values. There is a maximum score of 250.

In 2009, EA Games made a video game called "Hasbro Family Games Night 2". It had "Bop It" as one of the games that could be played. It is available for the Nintendo DS and the Nintendo Wii. In 2011, EA Games made an iPhone application which played exactly like the handheld game. It has the same commands from the handheld games and added extra commands which were never invented on the handheld game.



