Kiki's Delivery Service

Kiki's Delivery Service, known in Japan as , is a movie about a witch named Kiki who goes to live on her own for a year, just like all witches must do at her age. It's the fifth anime movie made at Studio Ghibli, and it was made by Hayao Miyazaki, their most famous director. It's based on the novel of the same name.

It begins with her listening to the radio and hears that there will be a full moon and runs to tell her mother she is leaving to start her training. She then leaves with a cat, Jiji, and while flying on her broom stick, runs into another witch who acts snobby. She then finds a town:Koriko, lives with a pregnant women who runs a bakery with her husband, starts a delivery service. After that, she gets a good friend;Kokiri. But suddenly Kiki loses her magical power so she can't fly with a broom stick and talk with her cat;Jiji. One day, Kokiri is involved in an accident airship.

Kiki is the main character of this movie. And she is witche. She can fly with a broom stick to use magical power.She goes Koriko town to pursuit of witche. In this town, she meets Osono and she runs her delivery service;Kiki's Delivery Service.CV:Minami takayama
Jiji is the black cat. He is Kiki' partner and his birthday is same with Kiki. He can talk with Kiki by using Kiki's magical power. He loves a white cat;Lily.CV:Rei Sakuma
Kokiri is Kiki's mother. And she is witche. She can fly with a broom stick and make a medicine from medical plants.CV:Meiko Nobusawa
Okino is Kiki's father.CV:Ko^ichi Miura
Tombo(Kobori) is a boy living in Koriko town. "Tombo" is his nickname and "Kobori" is his real name. He has a longing for flying.CV:Kappei Yamaguchi
Osono is the bakery owner in Koriko town. She met Kiki by chance, and she allowed Kiki to live her house. She was pregnant woman and finally she has a baby. CV:Keiko Toda
Fukuo is the baker and Osono's husband. He is a quiet and playful person. Also, his name don't be called in the movie. CV:Koichi Yamadera
Ursula is painter. She lives in the forest. When Kiki felt down about her delivery service, Ursula provide Kiki with encouragement. Also, her name is not said in the movie. CV: Minami Takayama
Maki is fashion designer. She is first customer of Kiki's Delivery Service. She lives next to bakery with a white cat. The name of cat is lily.CV:Kikuko Inoue


