Mark Hamill

Mark Richard Hamill (born September 25, 1951) is an American actor, voice actor, writer, producer, and director. Hamill is best known for his portrayal of Luke Skywalker in the original "Star Wars" trilogy (1977–1983), the "Star Wars" sequel trilogy (2015-2019), and for voicing The Joker in almost all animated Batman television series or animated movies.

Hamill has gained a reputation as a voice actor. He first did voice acting work in the early 1970s voicing the character Corey Anders on the Saturday morning cartoon "Jeannie" by Hanna-Barbera Productions. He later played Sean in the Ralph Bakshi film "Wizards", which was released just three months before "Star Wars" in 1977. In addition Hamill has also provided the voice for Fire Lord Ozai in , and Chanukah Zombie on Futurama.

Hamill is the co-writer of "The Black Pearl", a comic book miniseries published by Dark Horse Comics. He wrote an introduction to the Trade Paperback "Batman: Riddler Two-Face" which reprints various stories involving The Riddler and Two-Face to tie in with "Batman Forever". He has also written several stories for "Simpsons Comics", including "Catastrophe in Substitute Springfields!", which parodies DC's "Crisis on Infinite Earths" and also references several other classic comics.

Hamill directed and starred in the 2004 direct-to-DVD "". A comic book fan who attended science fiction and comic conventions before he became famous, Hamill stated that his character was based on an exaggerated version of himself. He and his crew shot most of the "mockumentary" film during the 2002 San Diego Comic-Con, and enlisted Stan Lee, Kevin Smith, Bruce Campbell and Hugh Hefner in small roles. The movie won an award for Best Live-Action DVD Premiere Movie at the 2005 DVD Exclusive Awards.

Hamill married dentist Marilou York in a private civil ceremony on December 17, 1978. They have three children together: Nathan (born September 25, 1979), Griffin (born March 4, 1983), and Chelsea Elizabeth (born July 27, 1988) On January 11, 1977, Hamill was in a car accident in which he fractured his nose and left cheekbone, requiring seven hours of surgery. According to Hamill in a recorded interview, he was driving his BMW on a freeway and became distracted, and seeing that he was missing his offramp, tried to negotiate four lanes of traffic (some real scars from the crash made an appearance in "The Empire Strikes Back").



