Doubs

Doubs is a department in eastern France. It is in the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region. It is named after the Doubs river.

The largest city in the department, and its prefecture (capital), is the city of Besançon.

Doubs is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790 with Besançon as its capital. It was formed from part of the old province of "Franche-Comté".

It was divided in six districts: Besançon, Baume-les-Dames, Saint-Hippolyte, Pontarlier, Quingey and Ornans. In 1800, with the creation of the "arrondissements" in France, the six districts were changed into four "arrondissements": Besançon, Baume-les-Dames, Pontarlier and Saint-Hippolyte. In 1816, the subprefecture of Saint-Hippolyte is moved to Montbéliard.

After the Battle of Waterloo (18 June 1815), the department was occupied by the Austrian army from June 1815 to November 1818.

On 10 September 1926, the "arrondissement" of Baume-les-Dames was eliminated.

Doubs is part of the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region. It has an area of .

The department borders with 3 departments of the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region (Jura, Haute-Saône and Territoire de Belfort) and 3 cantons of Switzerland (Vaud, Neuchâtel and Jura.

The Doubs department is partially on the Jura Mountains, mainly the eastern part of the department on the border with Switzerland. The highest point in the department is Mont d'Or (), high; it is on the border between the "communes" Jougne and Longevilles-Mont-d'Or at about to the south of the city of Pontarlier. The lowest point is where the Ognon leaves the department, high.

The main rivers in the department are the Doubs, that gives its name to the department, the Ognon and the Loue (tributary of the Doubs). 

The Köppen climate classification type for the climate at Besançon is an "Oceanic climate" (also known as Marine West Coast Climate) and of the subtype Cfb.

The average temperature for the year in Besançon is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month, on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Besançon is . The month with the most precipitation on average is September with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is February with an average of .

Doubs is managed by the "Departmental Council of Doubs" in Besançon. The department is part of the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region.

There are 3 "arrondissements" (districts), 19 "cantons" and 578 "communes" (municipalities) in Saône-et-Loire.

The following is a list of the 19 cantons of the Doubs department (with their INSEE codes), following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:
The inhabitants of Doubs are known, in French, as "Doubistes", or "Doubiens" (women: "Doubiennes").

Doubs had a population, in 2014, of 534,710, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Besançon, with 248,199 inhabitants, is the "arrondissement" with more inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Doubs

The cities with more than inhabitants in the department are:

Some places of interest are:




