Azad Kashmir

The State of Azad Jammu and Kashmir, () also called Azad Kashmir. In terms of land area it is bigger than Trinidad and Tobago but smaller than Brunei.
Pakistani region of Gilgit Baltistan is to the north, while the Indian Occupied territory of Jammu and Kashmir is to the east which is the region of dispute between Pakistan and India. Pakistani province Khyber Pakhtunkhwa is west of it, and the Pakistani province of Punjab is south of it.

The capital city of Azad Kashmir is Muzaffarabad. Azad Jammu and Kashmir has an area of 5,134 mi² (13,297 km²). The inhabitants of this region are Kashmiri citizens of ethnic Punjabi and Pahari origin. About 4 million people live there.

Azad Kashmir is a self-governing state under Pakistan. It has its own elected president, prime minister, legislature, high court, emblem and official flag. However, the highest body in the state is the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Council. This council has six members from the government of Azad Kashmir (including the President and the Prime Minister of Azad Kashmir) and five members from the government of Pakistan, including the President of Pakistan who is the chairman/chief executive of the council. Azad Kashmir is administratively divided into three divisions which, in turn, are divided into ten districts.

The Government of Azad Kashmir and Jammu is based in Muzaffarabad, the interim state capital of the Azad Kashmir disputed territory.

The state is divided into three divisions. The divisions are further divided into districts. There are 10 districts.

The northern part of Azad Jammu and Kashmir encompasses the lower area of the Himalayas, including Jamgarh Peak (). However, Hari Parbat peak in Neelum Valley is the highest peak in the state. Fertile, green, mountainous valleys are characteristic of Azad Kashmir's geography, making it one of the most beautiful regions of the subcontinent.

The region receives rainfall in both the winter and the summer. Muzaffarabad and Pattan are among the wettest areas of Pakistan. Throughout most of the region, the average rainfall exceeds 1400 mm, with the highest average rainfall occurring near Muzaffarabad (around 1800 mm). During the summer season, monsoon floods of the rivers Jhelum and Leepa are common due to extreme rains and snow melting.


