Books of Samuel

The Books of Samuel (, "Sefer Shmuw'el") are part of the Tanakh (part of the Hebrew Bible) and also of the Christian Old Testament.

The first book of Samuel tells the history of Israel from the birth of Samuel until Saul's death. 

The second book of Samuel tells the story of King David of Israel


Samuel was a Jewish priest, prophet, and judge over Israel in the Old Testament. He is found in 1 Samuel. His name suggests "Heard of God" (1 Samuel 1:20).

We cannot be sure when exactly Samuel was born. However, we do know from the Old Testament that his father was "a Zuphite from the hill country of Ephraim, whose name was Elkanah son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephraimite." His mother was Hannah. Hannah did not have any children, but Elkanah's other wife, Peninnah, had children, and this made her so sad she wept. Hannah prayed to God, "O Lord Almighty...if you will only...remember me, and not forget your servant but give her a son, then I will give him to the Lord for all the days of his life..." God gave her a son, and naming him Samuel, she kept her promise to God by giving him to the Lord (making him serve in the temple). There, "...the boy Samuel grew up in the presence of the Lord." At that time there was a priest named Eli: his sons were not good and sinned, but Samuel "...continued to grow in stature (height) and in favor with the Lord and with men." 

One day, when Samuel was a young boy still in the temple, he heard someone calling. He thought it was Eli, but Eli told him that God was talking to him. So Samuel went back and listened, and when he heard God calling, "Samuel! Samuel!" he said, "Speak (talk), for your servant is listening." Then the Lord told Samuel that he would destroy Eli's family because of Eli's sinful sons. Samuel told everything to Eli, and "...all Israel from Dan to Beersheba recognized (realized) that Samuel was...a prophet of the Lord. The Lord...revealed himself to Samuel through his word." 

Samuel made the people in Israel be sorry for their sins until he died. He also both Saul and David, Israel's first two kings, and also told Israel what the new order of God was when kings began ruling over Israel.


