1992 Atlantic hurricane season

The 1992 Atlantic hurricane season started on June 1, 1992, and lasted until November 30, 1992. However, storms can form outside these dates. For example, Subtropical Storm One formed on April 21. 

This season did not have very many storms, with only 3 tropical depressions, 3 subtropical/tropical storms, and 4 hurricanes. One of the 4 hurricanes (Hurricane Andrew) become a major hurricane (category 3+).

This season was not very deadly, but it was very damaging. There was only 66 deaths, but there was $26 billion in damage, all of which caused by Hurricane Andrew. Hurricane Andrew was the most damaging hurricane in the history of the United States, until Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

Subtropical Storm One started on April 21, more than a month before June 1, the start of hurricane season. It lasted only 3 days, before wind shear caused it to die. It was one of only two storms ever to form in April. The other was Tropical Storm Ana in 2003.

Tropical Depression One was a short-lived tropical depression. It started on June 25 and died on June 26, not long after striking Florida. This tropical depression killed 5 people and caused $2.6 million in damage.

Tropical Depression Two started on July 24. A wind gust near 40 mph made it seem like it would become a tropical storm. But the National Hurricane Center did not call it a tropical storm because the pressure was at 1015, which is very high for a tropical storm. Two moved sharply northeast before it died two days later, on July 26.

Hurricane Andrew was the strongest hurricane of the 1992 Atlantic hurricane season. It started on August 16. Later it hit land twice in Florida and once in Louisiana. Andrew caused nearly $26 billion in damage. This made it, at the time, the costliest hurricane in the history of the United States.

Bonnie started on September 17. It moved mostly east across the Atlantic and passed into the Azores before it died. The hurricane caused no damage, but may have killed one person in the Azores. 
Hurricane Charley started on September 21 in the far eastern Atlantic Ocean. It became a category 2 hurricane and passed into the Azores. Charley died on September 27.

Danielle started on September 22. It soon became a tropical storm. Tropical Storm Danielle made landfall in the Delmarva Peninsula before it died on September 26. The storm killed two people. 

Tropical Depression Seven started on September 25 about halfway between Africa and South America. Seven lasted nearly a week before it died on October 1.

Earl started on September 26 as a depression. This depression headed for Florida and became a tropical storm. It reversed course before hitting land in Florida. Tropical Storm Earl died on October 3.

Frances started on October 23 as a tropical storm and quickly became a hurricane. It took a path far from land. Hurricane Frances died on October 27.
This is the list of names that were set aside for 1992. Name that were not used are marked with .
In the spring of 1993 Hurricane Andrew got retired. In 1998 the name Alex was used instead.


