Pacific Division (NHL)

The National Hockey League's Pacific Division is one of two divisions that make up the Western Conference. It was formed in 1993 as part of league realignment. The Pacific Division is the surviving successor of the Smythe Division; the now-defunct Northwest Division was the other successor. Of the current Pacific Division teams, only the Anaheim Ducks never played in the Smythe Division (the Arizona Coyotes played in the Smythe when they were the original Winnipeg Jets).

The Pacific Division is centered around the Southwestern United States and Western Canada, with three teams based in California, two in Alberta, and one each in Arizona and British Columbia. A team from Nevada will join the division in 2017.

The San Jose Sharks have the most Pacific Division titles, with six. Five Stanley Cup winners have come from the Pacific Division: the Stars in 1999, the Colorado Avalanche in 1996, the Anaheim Ducks in 2007, and the Los Angeles Kings in 2012 and 2014.


The Vegas Golden Knights, which will start play in the 2017–18 season, will join the Pacific Division. 

When the Pacific Division was formed in 1993, it was identical to the Smythe Division, except that the Winnipeg Jets moved to the Central Division, and the expansion Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, now the Anaheim Ducks, joined. 

In addition to the Ducks, the Pacific featured the Calgary Flames, Edmonton Oilers, Los Angeles Kings, San Jose Sharks and Vancouver Canucks.

The Flames were the first team to win a Pacific Division title, capturing it in both 1993–94 and 1994–95.

The Pacific was expanded to seven teams in 1995 with the relocation of the Quebec Nordiques to Denver as the Colorado Avalanche. The Avs won the division title all three years they were in the Pacific, along with becoming the first Stanley Cup champion to represent the Pacific in 1996.

In 1998, the NHL once again realigned, moving to a six-division format. As a result, the Flames, Avalanche, Oilers and Canucks were split off into their own division, the Northwest Division. At the same time, the Winnipeg Jets relocated to Phoenix, Arizona to become the Phoenix Coyotes, now the Arizona Coyotes. Finally, the Dallas Stars moved in from the Central Division. This alignment lasted for 15 years.

The league returned to a four-division format beginning with the 2013–14 season. The Northwest Division was dissolved, and the Flames, Oilers, and Canucks returned to the Pacific. At the same time, the Stars returned to the Central Division.

The Pacific Division will add the expansion Vegas Golden Knights starting in the 2017–18 season.






