Brantford, Ontario

Brantford is a city in Ontario, Canada. There were 93,650 people in Brantford the last time the Government of Canada did a census count, in 2011.

Brantford is near Hamilton.

Brantford is sometimes called "The Telephone City", because the inventor of the telephone lived in Brantford. Hockey player Wayne Gretzky was born in Brantford.

Brantford became a city in 1877.

From 1900 until 1950, Brantford had many companies that made equipment and machinery. Those items were sold in Canada and many other countries. Having the river and a railroad for transportation made it easier to ship the items made in Brantford. That helped Brantford change from a farming town to an industrial city.

By the 1980s and 1990s, business in Brantford was dropping and some companies like White Farm Equipment, Massey-Ferguson, Koering-Waterous, Harding Carpets, and others stopped making products. Many people lost their factory jobs.

A new piece of highway (Highway 403) was built in 1997. The new highway made it easier to drive Hamilton and Toronto, and also to Detroit and Buffalo. So, in 2004, Procter & Gamble and Ferrero SpA moved to Brantford. Now other companies set up in Brantford because it is a good location for shipping products to eastern North America.

40% of people in Brantford did not finish high-school. In the rest of the province of Ontario, this number is 33%.

People in Brantford earn 9% less than people in the rest of Canada.


The city council was elected on October 27, 2014, and is led by Mayor Chris Friel. The city council, in addition to Friel, includes Larry Kings and Rick Weaver (Ward 1), John Sless and John Utley (Ward 2), Greg Martin and Dan McCreary (Ward 3), Cheryl Antoski and Richard Carpenter (Ward 4), and David Neumann and Brian Van Tilborg (Ward 5). There are municipal elections every four years across the province of Ontario. The next election will be in October 2018.

The "Brantford Expositor", which began in 1852, is printed six times a week (everyday except Sunday). The Brant News is published weekly in Brantford.


Brantford has its own television service: Rogers TV (cable 20), a local community channel on Rogers Cable. Other television stations come fromToronto, Hamilton and Kitchener.

Brantford has been used to film parts of the Murdoch Mysteries television series because it has lots of old architecture that fits with the years that the stories take place.

Movies like "Welcome to Mooseport" and "Where the Truth Lies" were partly made in Brantford. Part of "Due South", "Dr. Long Ball", was made at Arnold Anderson Stadium in a park in Brantford. Also, "Weirdsville", was made in Brantford in 2006. "Silent Hill" was made in the downtown in 2005.

Brantford Municipal Airport is in the west end of the city. It has an air show and sometimes the Snowbirds perform. The John C. Munro Hamilton International Airport in Hamilton is about 35 km east of Brantford. Toronto Pearson International Airport is in Mississauga, about 100 km north and east of Brantford.

The train station is located just north of downtown Brantford. VIA Rail has trains for people every day. Trains travel between Windsor, Ontario and Union Station in Toronto, Ontario.

Brantford Transit has nine bus routes that go every half-hour from the middle of the city on Darling Street. There are other buses for school times.

Greyhound Canada has buses that go to Toronto, Hamilton, London, Windsor, and other cities.



Brantford has a big Canada Day Festival on July 1. It has family events and Canadian music. More than 35,000 people come to the Festival.

In the past, these people have sung:







Brantford has many churches and religious temples. It is thought that there are over 35 churches in Brantford, including Anglican, Baptist, Roman Catholic, Pentecostal, Salvation Army, Presbyterian, United, Christadelphian, and Mormon. There are two mosques - a Sunni mosque and a Sufi mosque. There is also one Sikh temple.

Brantford is twinned with:



