Editus

Editus is a Costa Rican music group. The group included Ricardo Ramírez, Edín Solís and Carlos “Tapado” Vargas. Their music styles were a combination of modern, jazz, new age, classical music, and the unique sound of Latin America. 

Editus went to over 30 countries in North America, Europe and Latin America to give shows. They performed in places like The New York’s Carnegie Hall, The Kennedy Center Washington D.C., The Olimpia in Paris, the Montreux Jazz Festival in Switzerland, Monterrey Jazz Festival, Auditorio Nacional and Plaza del Sócalo in Mexico City.

They have worked with famous artists like León Gieco, Danilo Pérez, Aterciopelados, Tania Libertad, Armando Manzanero, Pedro Aznar, and Rubén Blades. They won the Grammy Award in 2000 with Blades for “Best Latin Pop Presentation” for the song called “Tiempos.” They have also won awards in the categories “Best World Music Album” and “Best Tropical Contemporary Album” for their album "Mundo".

They have received national awards like “Ancora” given by “La Nación” newspaper; the National Association of Authors and Musical Composers (ACAM) named them “The group with Best International Projection,” TELETICA named Editus as the “Artist of the Year 2000” and the newspaper “La República” awarded this group “Personality of the Year.”

During their career they have produced eleven albums, they are:

He was born in November 11th, 1967 in San José, Costa Rica. He is graduated from the University of Costa Rica in 1990. 

From 1983 to 1988 he was part of the Juvenile Symphonic Costa Rican Orchestra. He won the “Soloist teenagers” contest. In 1989 he worked as a soloist with the National Symphonic Orchestra.

Nowadays, he and his brothers are part of the “Trio de Cuerdas,” “Akustic Ensamble” as well as Trio “Ménage d Trois” with Martha Fonseca and Bernal Villegas.

He has played in national performances like “Inconsciente Colectivo,” “Gandhi,” Bernardo Quesada, María Prétiz, Patricia Torres, Duvalier Quirós, Cantoamérica, and Arnoldo Castillo. Out of the country, he record productions with “Son Miserables,” “Congreso” group and Alvaro Aguilar.

Solís was born in Zarcero on November 22nd, 1963. He is graduated in Classical Guitar from the University of Costa Rica Conservatory. He learned how to play the guitar with the Argentinean teachers Jorge Cardoso and Miguel A. Girolet, a Spanish teacher Demetrio Ballesteros, Francisco Ortíz and Víctor Monge.
In 1991 he won the National Prize Contest of guitar and toured Spain, France, and Germany.

From 1985 through 1990 he toured with Cantoamérica Guitarist. He traveled to the United States and Guatemala to show their music style. In 1991, he went to Europe to give his tour as a soloist in Paris, Santiago de Compostela in Spain, Bonn and Köln, both cities of Germany.

He was born in January 22nd, 1971 in San José, Costa Rica. He is graduated in 1987 from the Castella Conservatory. He studied with the percussionist Giovanni Hidalgo and in the teen program of the National Symphonic Orchestra. 

He is part of the National Symphonic Orchestra and The Juvenile Symphonic Orchestra of Costa Rica. Also he has participated in Marfil, Gaviota y Amarillo and Cian Magenta groups. He has played for Paquita D’Rivera and Victor Monge (known as Serranto), Abraham Laboriel, Alvaro López, Justo Almario, Diego Urcola. He was part of Cantoamérica and Cono Sur and also Probus Ensamble Group. At present, he is the percussionist of Malpaís, Kool Jazz and Jazz Latino Sextet. 


