Tarn-et-Garonne

Tarn-et-Garonne is a department in the southwest of France, in the Occitanie region. It is named after the Garonne river and its tributary Tarn. Its prefecture and largest city is Montauban.

Tarn-et-Garonne is not one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790. It was created on 4 November 1808 during the First French Empire by Napoleon I.

It was formed out of territories belonging to neighboring areas. More than half of the territory was taken from the Lot (including Montauban and Moissac), over one-third was taken from Haute-Garonne (including Castelsarrasin), and the rest from the departments of Lot-et-Garonne, Gers, and Aveyron.

The new department had three "arrondissements": Montauban, Castelsarrasin and Moissac. The prefecture was Montauban. On 10 September 1926, the "arrondissement" of Moissac was eliminated.

Tarn-et-Garonne is part of the Occitanie region. It has an area of .

The department borders with 6 departments:

The highest point in the department, at , is the Puech des Carts - Sommet Nord (), in the commune of Castanet.

Even if Tarn-et-Garonne is one of the smallest departments of Metropolitan France, there is a great diversity of landscapes in the department; for example, the plains between the Tarn and Garonne rivers and in the valley of the Aveyron river, the hills of the Lomagne region (southwest of the department) and in the north, including the "Causse" (a limestone plateau) of the northeast.

The main rivers in the department are the Garonne and its tributaries Tarn and Aveyron.

The climate of Montauban is an oceanic climate with template summers, Cfb (Marine West Coast Climate) in the Köppen climate classification.

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Montauban is . The month with the most precipitation on average is October with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is February with an average of .

The average temperature for the year in Montauban is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

Tarn-et-Garonne is managed by the "Departamental Council of Tarn-et-Garonne" in Montauban. The department is part of the region of Occitanie.

There are 2 "arrondissements" (districts), 15 "cantons" and 195 "communes" (municipalities) in Tarn-et-Garonne.

The following is a list of the 15 cantons of the Tarn-et-Garonne department (with their INSEE codes), following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:
The inhabitants of Tarn-et-Garonne are known, in French, as "Tarn-et-Garonnais" (women: "Tarn-et-Garonnaises").

, Tarn-et-Garonne had a population of 252,578, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Montauban, with 175,756 inhabitants, is the "arrondissement" with more inhabitants. The "arrondissement" of Castelsarrasin has 76,822 inhabitants.

The city with more people living in it is the capital, Montauban (58,826). The subprefecture of Castelsarrasin has 13,765 inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Tarn-et-Garonne

The cities with more than 5,000 inhabitants in the department are:




