Haute-Garonne

Haute-Garonne ("Upper Garonne"; ) is a department in the southwest of France named after the Garonne river. Its main city and prefecture of the department is Toulouse.

Haute-Garonne is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on March 4, 1790. It was created from part of the former province of Languedoc.

The department was originally larger than now because it included the district of Castelsarrasin which was transferred to the department of Tarn-et-Garonne when it was created in 1808.

Haute-Garonne has an area of . It is part of the Occitanie region. The department is not a historical region of France; this is an administrative division made from various pieces of Languedoc and Gascogne.

The department is surrounded by the departments:

and by Spain (provinces of Lleida and Huesca) to the south.

The department is crossed by the upper course of the Garonne river (hence the name) for nearly . The borders of the department follow the river. The Garonne enters France from Spain at the town of Fos, goes through Toulouse and leaves the department. Two big canals cross the department from east to west: the Canal du Midi and the Canal de Garonne.

There are three distinct geographical areas in the department:

The climate of the department is an oceanic climate with template summers, Cfb in the Köppen climate classification.

The department is managed by the "Departamental Council of the Haute-Garonne" in Toulouse. The Haute-Garonne is part of the region of Occitanie.

There are 3 "arrondissements" (districts), 27 "cantons" and 589 "communes" (municipalities) in the Haute-Garonne.

The following is a list of the 27 cantons of the Haute-Garonne department (with their INSEE codes), in France, following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:

The inhabitants of Haute-Garonne are known, in French, as "Haut-Garonnais" (women: "Haut-Garonnaises").

Haute-Garonne has a population, in 2014, of 1,317,668, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Toulouse, with 1,024,517 inhabitants, is by far the largest. The other two, Muret and Saint-Gaudens, have respectively 215,606 and 77,545 inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Haute-Garonne

The 10 cities with more people living in them in 2014 in the department are:




