Sarlat-la-Canéda

Sarlat-la-Canéda (), or simply Sarlat, is a town and commune in southwestern France, in the region of Aquitaine. It is a subprefecture of the Dordogne department.

The city developed around a Carolingian Benedictine abbey in the 13th century. The abbey already existed in the 9th century. it was part of the six great abbeys of the old province of Périgord. The others were Paunat, Belvès, Saint Front de Périgueux, Brantôme and Terrasson. The Carolingian abbey was the only one to be spared by the Vikings because it does not lie on the Dordogne river or its tributaries. In 1317, Sarlat became the seat of a bishop.

The city was badly damaged in the Hundred Years' War. After several conflicts it was rebuilt in Renaissance style between 1450 and 1500. In the middle of the 17th century, the city lost political influence and became poorer.

On 1 March 1965, the "communes" of Sarlat and of La Canéda were combined in one "commune" with the name of Sarlat-la-Canéda.

The "commune" of Sarlat-la-Canéda has an area of and its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is .

Sarlat-la-Canéda is surrounded by the "communes" Tamniès, Marquay. Marcillac-Saint-Quentin, Proissans, Sainte-Nathalène, Saint-Vincent-le-Paluel, Carsac-Aillac, Vitrac, Vézac and Saint-André-d'Allas.

Sarlat-la-Canéda has an oceanic climate with template summers (Köppen climate classification: Cfb).

The inhabitants of Sarlat-la-Canéda are known, in French, as "Sarladais" (women: "Sarladaises").

With a population of 9,127 (2014), Sarlat-la-Canéda has a population density of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Sarlat-la-Canéda

Sarlat-la-Canéda forms the urban area of Sarlat-la-Canéda with a population of 9,259 inhabitants (2013) and an area of . This urban area is the centre of the metropolitan area of Sarlat-la-Canéda, formed by 17 "communes" with a population of 19,520 inhabitants (2013) and an area of .

Sarlat-la-Canéda is a subprefecture of the Dordogne and the capital of the "arrondissement" of Sarlat-la-Canéda.

The "commune" is the administrative centre () of the canton of "Sarlat-la-Canéda"', formed with 13 "communes".

It is part of the intercommunality "Sarlat-Périgord Noir" ().





