List of sex positions

This list of sex positions is a list of different ways to have sexual intercourse and other sexual acts.

These positions involve a penis going into a vagina or anus.

These positions are used for vaginal or anal sex. The basic position is called the missionary position. In it, the receiving partner lies on his or her back with legs apart. The partner lies on top of the receiving partner, facing them. The penetrating partner enters so that the base of the penis rubs the clitoris.

Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal sex.

The receiving partner is kneeling or on all four limbs. The penetrating partner his penis from behind.

Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal sex.

The receving partner is on his/her hands and knees with their bottom exposed. The penetrating partner then pumps away at the receiving partner's vagina or anus with his penis.

Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal sex.

The penetrating partner sits down, with their legs stretched out. The receiving partner sits on top and wraps their legs around the penetrating partner. This is called pounding on the spot.

In the basic standing position, both partners stand facing each other and have vaginal sex. The shorter partner can stand on a stair if the partners are different heights. It may be easier if the woman has her back to a wall.

Most of the above positions can be used for anal sex.

Outercourse or frottage is sometimes part of foreplay or to avoid intercourse.

Genital-genital sex, sometimes called GG rubbing, is when two males rub penises together (sometimes called frot or frottage) or when two females rub vulvae together (sometimes called tribadism or scissoring).

Oral sex is the term given to genital stimulation by the mouth. People may engage in oral sex as part of foreplay before intercourse, or during or following intercourse. It may also be performed for its own sake.

Fellatio is a kind of oral sex that involves a man letting his penis be licked or "eaten" by his partner. The man's partner can be either a woman or another man. There are several ways to have oral sex.

Note: Fellatio doesn't have to involve 2 people. Some men have a long-enough penis and a good enough stretch to lick or put their own penis into their mouth. However, this is called autofellatio or autofellation.

Cunnilingus is oral sex involving a woman's genitals. There are several ways to have oral sex.

"Main article:" 69 (sex position)

Oral sex between two people at the same time is called 69. Partners can be lying side-by-side, lying one on top of the other, or standing with one partner holding the other upside down.

Positions for anilingus, also known as "rimming", "anal-oral sex" or "rimjob" are:

When three people have sex with each other, it is called a threesome. You can have:

Multiple penetration, or double penetrationmeans someone is in more than one place. Types of double penetration are:






