2014 FIFA World Cup

The 2014 FIFA World Cup was the 20th FIFA World Cup being held in Brazil. It was the second time that Brazil hosted the World Cup and the fourth time that a South American country hosted the FIFA tournament. Germany won the tournament after defeating Argentina 1–0. The defending champions, Spain, were eliminated from the World Cup after losing to the Netherlands and Chile in the group stage and the host country, Brazil, were eliminated after a record-breaking 1–7 loss to Germany.

Before the tournament began, all teams received US$1.5 million for preparation costs. The teams that were eliminated from the Group Stage got US$8 million, from the Round of 16 got US$9 million, and from the Quarter-Finals got US$14 million. The fourth place team got US$20 million, the third place team got US$22 million, the second place team got US$25 million and the champions got US$35 million.

A total of Seventeen cities showed interest in being chosen as World Cup host cities: São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Belo Horizonte, Porto Alegre, Brasília, Belém, Campo Grande, Cuiabá, Curitiba, Florianópolis, Fortaleza, Goiânia, Manaus, Natal, Recife (a stadium would be shared by both cities), Rio Branco and Salvador. Maceió withdrew in January 2009.

According to current FIFA practice, no more than one city may use two stadiums, and the number of host cities is limited between eight and ten. The Brazilian Football Confederation (CBF) requested permission to assign 12 cities hosting World Cup Finals. On 26 December 2008, FIFA gave the green light to the 12-city plan.

Even before the 12 host cities were selected, there were few doubts that the chosen venue for the final match will be the Maracanã in Rio de Janeiro, which also hosted the decisive match of the 1950 FIFA World Cup. Originally the CBF's intentions were to have the opening match at Morumbi Stadium in São Paulo, the largest city in Brazil. However, on 14 June 2010 the stadium was excluded from hosting games in the tournament due to a failure to provide financial guarantees for the improvements needed to have it as an eligible venue. In the end of August 2010, the CBF announced that the new Corinthians stadium will host the matches in São Paulo.

The 12 host cities for the 2014 World Cup were announced on 31 May 2009. Belém, Campo Grande, Florianópolis, Goiânia and Rio Branco were rejected.

A win would earn the team 3 points, a draw would earn them 1 point, and a loss earns them no points.

<br>









