Peyton Manning

Peyton Williams Manning (born March 24, 1976) is an retired American football quarterback. He played a total of 18 seasons in the National Football League (NFL). He played for the Indianapolis Colts and Denver Broncos. He played college football for the Tennessee Volunteers. Many people think that Peyton Manning is one of the best quarterbacks in National Football League history. Manning played college football for the University of Tennessee before he played professional football. Manning spent the first 14 seasons of his pro career with the Indianapolis Colts. He joined the team in 1998 when he was drafted ahead of Ryan Leaf, who was a bust. Peyton is the son of former NFL quarterback Archie Manning and the older brother of current New York Giants quarterback Eli Manning. 

Manning has been in many television commercials. He has represented Papa Johns and Nationwide. He has also had his picture on the covers of some video games for the Xbox, and was on an episode of "Saturday Night Live". Manning has also made a lot donations to charities and he has his own charitable group, called the Peyback foundation.

On February 4, 2007, Manning led the Indianapolis Colts to a victory over the Chicago Bears in Super Bowl XLI. He was called the Most Valuable Player of that game. Manning was released by the Colts after missing all of the 2011 season with a neck injury. He signed with the Denver Broncos. Manning is also famous for his yelling and pointing before the snap while making last-second changes.

Peyton's father Archie Manning and brother Eli Manning have also played quarterback, but Peyton is the most successful.

Peyton Manning became the second quarterback after Brett Favre to beat the other 32 teams, after the Denver Broncos defeated the Indianapolis Colts (Manning's former team), in their season opener. He is one of the 3 quarterbacks who defeated the other 31 teams after Tom Brady and Brett Favre.

On March 7, 2016, Manning announced that he was retiring from professional football. 



