Gironde

Gironde () is a department in the southwest of France. It is named after the Gironde estuary.

The department is in the region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine. Its prefecture is Bordeaux.

Gironde was formed during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790 with parts of the old provinces of Guyenne and Gascony.

From July 1793 to April 1795, the department's name was changed to Bec-d'Ambès to avoid the association with the Girondists, a French revolutionary group.

The department was divided into seven districts: Bordeaux, Libourne, La Réole, Bazas, Cadillac, Blaye and Lesparre. Its capital was the city of Bordeaux.

Gironde is part of the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region, southwestern France, and is the largest department of Metropolitan France with an area of .

There four main zones in the Gironde; they are:

The department is bordered by the departments: Charente-Maritime, Dordogne, Lot-et-Garonne and Landes. The Atlantic Ocean ("Gulf of Biscay") is to the west of the department.

The main rivers in the department are the Dordogne and the Garonne rivers; the two rivers form, after their confluence, the Gironde estuary, the largest estuary of France.

The climate in Bordeaux is Marine West Coast Climate (Köppen climate classification Cfb), with mild winters and warm summers.

The average temperature for the year in Bordeaux is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Bordeaux is . The month with the most precipitation on average is November with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is July with an average of .

Gironde is part of the region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine and is managed by the "Departmental Council of Gironde" in Bordeaux.

There are 6 "arrondissements" (districts), 33 "cantons" and 538 "communes" (municipalities) in Gironde.

The following is a list of the 33 cantons of the Gironde department (with their INSEE codes), following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:

The inhabitants of Gironde are known, in French, as "Girondins" (women: "Girondines").

The department of Gironde has a population, in 2014, of 1,526,016, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Bordeaux, with 921,668 inhabitants, is by far the largest. The "arrondissements" of Blaye and Lesparre-Médoc are those with less people, with 88,115 and 86,560 inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Gironde

The main cities in the department are:




