Mao

The Dominican city of Santa Cruz de Mao, or simply Mao, is the head municipality of the Valverde province, on the northwest of the country. It is the largest city of the Dominican northwest and the centre of the region.

Its name, a Taíno word, comes from the Mao river, near the city. Its nickname is "Ciudad de los Bellos Atardeceres" ("City of the Beautiful Sunsets") because there are not mountains to the west of the city and it is common to see a "red" sky during sunsets; it is a very dry region and there are much dust in the air which gives the red color to the sky.

The city had, in , a total population of 51,647: 25,663 men and 25,984 women. The urban population was of the total population.

For most of its history, the region was called "El Despoblado"; that means a region without any population, because it is a very dry region and agriculture was not possible.

When the governor of the Spanish colony gave the order in 1606 that everybody living on the northern coast had to move inland, some people came to live around the present Mao. They had cows that were raised in "hatos"; "hato" means a large farm for raising cattle (a ranch). And so "hato" is the name of many places around Mao: Hatico, Hato del Yaque, Hato Nuevo, Hato Viejo, Hato del Medio.

The town of Mao was built close to where the Mao river flows into the Yaque del Norte river. The first Catholic church was build in 1869.

Mao was made a "Puesto Cantonal" (an old category similar to the present Municipal District under a military government). In 1882, Mao was elevated to the category of municipality and in 1904 its official name was changed to "Valverde" after José Desiderio Valverde, past President of the Dominican Republic. Because the name Mao was known by everybody and Valverde was a new name, people called the city as "Valverde (Mao)", and it is still common to say so.

When the province was created in 1959, Mao was made its head municipality and provincial capital.

Mao has a total area of , about of the total area of the province of Valverde. The city is an elevation of , and at to the northwest of Santo Domingo.

The municipality of Mao has the Santiago Rodríguez province to the west, the Santiago province to the south and east, the municipality of Laguna Salada to the northwest and the municipality of Esperanza to the northeast.

Mao has a tropical wet and dry/savanna climate (Köppen-Geiger classification: Aw) with a pronounced dry season in winter.

The average amount of rainfall for the year in the city is . The month with the most precipitation on average is May with of rainfall, followed by October with .

The driest season is winter. The month with the least rainfall on average is January with an average of and the second is July with .

Mao is in a hot region; the average temperature for the year is .

The municipality of Mao has three municipal districts:

The main economic activity of the province is agriculture; the main products in the municipality are rice, bananas and plantain.


