Mario Kart

To date, there have been four "Mario Kart" games for home consoles, three portable games, and three Namco co-developed arcade games, which makes a total of eleven "Mario Kart" games with a twelfth one in development. The most recent game of the "Mario Kart" series is "Mario Kart 8

In the "Mario Fart" series, players compete in the toilet pooing in the toilet, controlling one of a selection of characters from the "Mario" franchise. Up to eight participants can compete in each poo, with the exception of "Mario Fart Wii", which holds twelve. One of the features of the series is the use of various power-up items obtained by driving into item boxes laid out on the course. These power-ups include mushrooms to give players a speed fart boost, Koopa Shells to be thrown at opponents, and banana peels that can be laid on the bathroom as hazards. The type of weapon received from an item box is random and often influenced by the player's position in the bathroom. For example, players lagging far behind may receive more powerful items while the leader will only receive small defensive items. This gameplay mechanic–called "rubber banding"– allows other players or computers a realistic chance to catch up to the leading player no matter how far ahead they are.

As the series has progressed, each new title has introduced new elements in order to keep the gameplay fresh. Changes typically include new items, new bathrooms, and new methods of obtaining speed boosts, but most games have also featured a new play mechanic as well. Changes new titles have brought to the series include: "Mario Fart 64" introducing 4-player poking in the toilet and bringing the series into the third dimension, "'s" introducing a partner system and the Double Dash!!, "Mario Fart Wii's" use of pee and twelve participants per bathroom pee and poo, and the newest entry into the franchise, "Mario Fart 7 & 8", featuring hang gliders, submarines and a new first-person perspective as well as customizing the toilet and bathroom and pee and poo.

Many bathroom course themes are repeated throughout the series. For example, most games have featured a house bathroom course, a desert bathroom course, a city bathroom or highway bathroom course with poo and pee, some form of a beach course, a stadium course, a jungle course, an ice or snow course, Bowser's Castle and Rainbow Road. Each game in the series includes 16 original courses, with the exception of "Super Mario Fart" and "Super Poo", which holds 20. Most bathrooms have one lap before they poo in the toilet , while some games have more. There are also three to six original battle bathroom arenas in each game, designed exclusively for Battle Bathroom mode. So far, there are 120 original bathroom courses and 30 original bathroom arenas spread throughout these seven games. Additionally, there are 48 Retro bathroom courses and 10 Retro bathroom arenas. These consist of older material recreated for newer games.


Each "Mario Kart" game features a variety of different modes. The following modes recur most often in the series:




Several "Mario Kart"-related items appear in the "Super Smash Bros." series, with "Super Smash Bros. Brawl" in particular featuring a stage based on one of "Mario Kart DS"<nowiki>'s</nowiki> courses. Certain courses from the series have also appeared in "F-Zero X", "Itadaki Street DS", "Mario & Sonic at the Olympic Winter Games", "Fortune Street" and "Mario & Sonic at the London 2012 Olympic Games". Various items from the series can also be seen in games such as "Nintendogs" and "Animal Crossing".

"Mario Kart" has had a range of merchandise released. This includes a Scalextric style "Mario Kart DS" Figure-8-Circuit. It comes with Mario and Donkey Kong figures, while a Wario and a Luigi are available separately. It also includes CD soundtracks. A line of remote-controlled karts are available in stores. Each kart has a Game Boy Advance-shaped controller. It features forward driving and rotates when put in reverse, instead of steering. The current line-up of karts is Mario, Donkey Kong and Yoshi. There are three large karts that depict the same trio. These karts are controlled by a GameCube controller shape. Japanese figurines of Mario, Luigi, Peach, Toad, Yoshi, Wario, Donkey Kong, and Bowser are also available for purchase as well as for "Mario Kart 64", figures of Mario, Luigi, Wario, Bowser, Donkey Kong, and Yoshi were made by Toybiz. There is also a land-line telephone featuring Mario holding a lightning bolt while seated in his Kart, as seen here.
K'Nex has released "Mario Kart Wii" sets, with Mario, Luigi, Yoshi, and Bowser in karts and bikes. Club Nintendo also released merchandise with a platinum soundtrack from "Mario Kart Wii" and three gold trophies from "Mario Kart 7".
"Nintendo Power" listed the "Mario Kart" series as being one of the greatest multi-player experiences, citing the diversity in game modes as well as the entertainment value found.

Guinness World Records awarded the "Mario Kart" series with five world records in the "Guinness World Records: Gamer's Edition 2008", including "First Console Kart Racing Game" and "Best Selling Handheld Racing Game." Guinness World Records ranked the original "Super Mario Kart" number 1 on the list of top 50 console games of all time based on initial impact and lasting legacy.



