Bambi

Bambi is a 1942 American animated drama movie. David Hand was the head director (he was in charge of other directors). It was made by Walt Disney. It is based on the book "Bambi, A Life in the Woods" by Felix Salten. The movie was sent to theaters by RKO Radio Pictures on August 13, 1942. It is the fifth movie in the Walt Disney Animated Classics series. The story is about a baby deer named Bambi. He learns to grow up in the wild after his mother is shot by hunters. The main characters are Bambi, a white tailed deer, his parents (the Great Prince of the forest and his mother), and his friends Thumper (a rabbit), Flower (a skunk), and friend Faline, who becomes his wife later.

For the movie, Disney changed Bambi to a white-tailed deer. In the book, Bambi was a Roe Deer. However, roe deer do not live in the United States, and Americans know more about white-tailed deer. The movie was nominated for three Academy Awards: Best Sound (Sam Slyfield), Best Song (for "Love Is a Song" sung by Donald Novis) and Original Music Score. In June 2008, the American Film Institute came up with a list of its "Top 10"—the best ten movies—after asking over 1,500 people. "Bambi" came in third in animation. In December 2011, the movie was added to the National Film Registry of the Library of Congress.

The movie starts with a wise old owl that tells a story about a little fawn called Bambi that was born in the woods. In his first days of life, he explores the forest around him. He makes a friend named Thumper, who is a rabbit. Bambi learns new words every day, "Bird" is his first word. He learns "butterflies", "rain", and the "meadow". He sees his father (the Great Prince of the Forest) for the first time. The movie first shows Bambi's childhood, such as a walk in the woods, a day in the meadow, and his first experience seeing snow.

The most famous part of the movie is the death of Bambi's mother. Bambi and his mother have trouble finding food. One day, Bambi's mother finds a patch of grass, and they eat. The audience hears scary music (Man's theme). Bambi's mother senses danger. She tells Bambi to run. As they run across an icy field, she screams "Faster! Faster, Bambi! Don't look back! Keep running! Keep running!" Bambi makes it but a gunshot is heard. Bambi makes it back to the den but finds that his mother is no longer there. He wanders around, desperately calling for her, and bumps into his father, the Great Prince, who tells him that "your mother can't be with you anymore". Bambi follows his father into the woods, taking one last look behind him. 
The next spring, Bambi and his friends are adults. They meet a wise old owl, called Friend Owl, who tells them of the dangers of falling in love. They make vows not to, but are in love at first sight in no time. Bambi falls in love with his old childhood friend Faline, and is happily dancing in the clouds until another deer steps in the way. He tries to get Faline to go with him, but Bambi will not and gets into a fight with this deer. Bambi wins, and goes on a date with Faline. The Man comes back and makes more trouble for the animals. Bambi saves Faline from a pack of angry dogs.

A forest fire comes and nearly destroys everything. Bambi has trouble getting up, but his father helps him. They both make it to an island where the animals have gathered. The following spring, everyone goes to see Bambi and Faline's new fawns (baby deer), with the wise owl saying that Bambi should be proud. The Great Prince steps down from his current place as king, and Bambi is left standing proudly. The beginning song, "Love is a Song", is sung again by a chorus.

Walt Disney wanted to have realistic detail in this animated movie. The artists learned from animal experts, and visited the Los Angeles Zoo. A pair of fawns (named Bambi and Faline) were shipped from the area of present-day Baxter State Park in Maine to the studio so that the artists could see for themselves the movement of these animals. The source of these fawns, from the Eastern United States, gave the company the idea to change Felix Salten's Roe Deer to a white-tailed deer. The background of the movie was also the Eastern woodlands — one of the earliest and best known artists for the Disney studio, Maurice "Jake" Day spent a lot of weeks in the Vermont and Maine forests, drawing pictures and taking photographs of deer, fawns, and the wilderness areas around them.



"Bambi" was released in theaters in 1942, during World War II. It was Disney's 5th full-length animated movie. "Bambi" was re-released to theatres in 1947, 1957, 1966, 1975, 1982, and 1988. It was then made available on home video in 1989. Even in home video, "Bambi" has seen many releases, including two VHS releases, in 1989 (Classics Version) and 1997 (Masterpiece Collection Version), and a digitally-remastered and restored Platinum Edition DVD. The Platinum Edition DVD went on moratorium on January 31, 2007.

Bambi was released in Diamond Edition on March 1, 2011, consisting of a Blu-ray and DVD combo pack. According to Cinema Blend, this release is set to include multiple bonus features that were not previously included in Bambi home releases: a documentary entitled "Inside Walt’s Story Meetings – Enhanced Edition", two deleted scenes, a deleted song, an image gallery, and a game entitled "Disney’s Big Book of Knowledge: Bambi Edition". The release also marked the first use of "Disney Second Screen", a feature which is accessed via a computer or iPad app download that syncs with the Blu-ray disc, allowing the viewer to follow along by interacting with animated flip-books, galleries and trivia while watching the movie. A UK version of Diamond Edition was released on February 7, 2011.

"Bambi II" is a story which takes place after Bambi's mother dies, but before Bambi becomes an adult. It shows the Great Prince of the Forest having trouble raising Bambi, and Bambi not being sure if his father really loves him. The movie was released direct-to-video on February 7, 2006. While the movie was a direct-to-video release in the United States and other countries, including Canada, China, Hong Kong, Japan and Taiwan, it was a theatrical release in some countries, including Australia, Austria, Brazil, Dominican Republic, France, Mexico, the United Kingdom and some other European countries.




