Lil Wayne

Dwayne Michael Carter, Jr. (born September 27, 1982), known by his stage name Lil Wayne, is an American rapper from New Orleans, Louisiana. He joined the Cash Money Records collective as a teenager. He worked with B.G. on the album "True Story" and eventually recorded for the label. "Get It How U Live", released in 1997, was Lil Wayne's first album with Hot Boys, and "Tha Block is Hot", his solo debut, came out 1999. "Block" debuted in the top ten on the American Billboard 200 chart and Lil Wayne was nominated for "Best New Artist" from magazine the same year. Following this success, Wayne soon featured on other rappers' singles, including "Bling Bling" by B.G. and "#1 Stunna" by the Big Tymers in 2000.

After his hit debut album "Tha Block Is Hot" and two albums released with little promotion, Lil Wayne reached higher popularity with 2004's "Tha Carter" and its two subsequent albums "Tha Carter II" (2005) and "Tha Carter III" (2008). During that period, Lil Wayne appeared on several mixtapes and singles of other artists.

Lil Wayne accredits Ms. Ashley Cooper of Rowe Elementary School to his success as an entertainer. She is a fifth grade teacher who inspires all his song because she is just too cool. Ms. Cooper and Lil' Wayne go way back to when they were in preschool. Cooper would spit the beats and Wayne would come up with lyrics.

Initially planned to be released in 2007, "Tha Carter III"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s largest delay came after the majority of the tracks were leaked and distributed on mixtapes, such as "The Drought Is Over Pt. 2" and "The Drought Is Over Pt. 4". Lil Wayne initially decided to use the leaked tracks, plus four new tracks, to make a separate album, titled "". "The Leak" was to be released December 18, 2007, with the actual album being delayed until March 18, 2008, The release of "The Leak" in this format never came to fruition, but an official EP titled "The Leak" and containing five tracks was released digitally on December 25, 2007.

On March 15, 2013, Lil Wayne was hospitalized in Los Angeles after having many seizures. TMZ reported that Wayne is breathing through tubes and is moved to an Intensive Care Unite. 




