Megalodon

The megalodon was the largest shark of all time. Its scientific name is Carcharodon megalodon. It lived from the late Oligocene to early Pleistocene epochs, 28 to 1.5 million years ago (mya). 

This giant of a shark was a huge version of the current great white shark, "Carcharodon carcharias". Megalodon had teeth, which are among the largest ever found, over 7 inches (18 cm) long. Nicolaus Steno was the first to recognise the teeth as those of a giant shark. The shark was up to 52 feet long (16 meters) and weigh over 60 tons.

The skeleton of a Megalodon was made of cartilage, but it was calcified: it had calcium to strengthen it. Megalodon teeth, however were bone and can be found in all oceans. Other remains found are vertebrae.

Fossil records of "C. megalodon" indicate that it occurred in subtropical to temperate latitudes. Before the formation of the Isthmus of Panama, the seas were relatively warmer. This would have made it possible for the species to live in all the oceans of the world.

"C. megalodon" lived in many marine environments (i.e. continental shelf waters, coastal upwelling, swampy coastal lagoons, sandy littorals, and offshore deep water environments), and moved from place to place. Adult "C. megalodon" were not abundant in shallow water environments, and mostly lurked offshore. "C. megalodon" may have moved between coastal and oceanic waters, at different stages in its life.

Megalodon hunted large and medium-sized whales, attacking the bony areas, such as chest, fins, or tail. This would stop the whale, or it could kill quickly with a fatal bite to the chest region. Megalodon could bite with the one of the strongest bites in the animal kingdom's history.

Its great size, high-speed swimming capability, and powerful jaws coupled with formidable killing apparatus, made it an apex predator eating a range of fauna. 

Fossil evidence is that "C. megalodon" preyed on cetaceans (i.e., dolphins, small whales, and "Odobenocetops", and large whales, (including sperm whales, bowhead whales, and rorquals pinnipeds, porpoises, sirenians, and giant sea turtles.

Marine mammals were regular prey targets for "C. megalodon". Many whale bones have been found with clear signs of large bite marks (deep gashes) made by teeth that match those of "C. megalodon", and various excavations have revealed "C. megalodon" teeth lying close to the chewed remains of whales, and sometimes in direct association with them. Fossil evidence of interactions between "C. megalodon" and pinnipeds also exist. In one interesting observation, a "C. megalodon" tooth was found lying very close to a bitten earbone of a sea lion.


