Haute-Saône

Haute-Saône is a department in the east of France. It is in the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region. It is named after the Saône river and its capital (prefecture) is the city of Vesoul.

Haute-Saône is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on 4 March 1790. It was formed from part of the old province of "Franche-Comté".

It was divided in six districts: Jussey, Luxeuil, Lure, Vesoul, Gray and Champlitte with the capital in Gray alternating with Vesoul. In 1794, only Gray remained as the capital.

In 1800, with the creation of the "arrondissements" in France, the six districts were changed into three "arrondissements": Vesoul, Gray and Lure; the capital was moved from Gray to Vesoul.

After the Battle of Waterloo (18 June 1815), the department was occupied by the Austrian army from June 1815 to November 1818.

On 10 September 1926, the "arrondissement" of Gray was eliminated.

Haute-Saône is part of the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region. It has an area of .

The department borders with 6 other departments in two regions:

The main river in the department is the Saône, that flows through the department from northeast to southwest. The highest mountain in the department is "Ballon de Servance" (), high; it is in the "commune" Servance-Miellin.

The Köppen climate classification type for the climate at Lure is an "Oceanic climate" (also known as Maritime Temperate climate) and of the subtype Cfb.

The average temperature for the year in Lure is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month, on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Lure is . The month with the most precipitation on average is August with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is March with an average of .

Haute-Saône is managed by the "Departmental Council of Haute-Saône" in Vesoul. The department is part of the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region.

There are 2 "arrondissements" (districts), 17 "cantons" and 542 "communes" (municipalities) in Haute-Saône.

The following is a list of the 17 cantons of the Haute-Saône department (with their INSEE codes), following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:
The inhabitants of Haute-Saône are known, in French, as "Haut-Saônois" (women: "Haut-Saônoises").

Haute-Saône had a population, in 2014, of 238,347, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Vesoul, with 129,622 inhabitants, is the "arrondissement" with more inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Haute-Saône

The cities with more than inhabitants in the department are:




