Villefranche-de-Rouergue

Villefranche-de-Rouergue () is a commune in southern France in the Aveyron department, in the region of Occitanie. It is the "sous-prefecture" (capital) of the "arrondissement" of the same name in the Aveyron department.

In 1252, Alphonse de Poitiers, Count of Toulouse, sent Jean d'Arcis, Seneschal of Rouergue, to build a city along the Aveyron as a new capital for Rouergue (an old French province): Villefranche-de-Rouergue. From 1369 to the French Revolution, Villefranche-de-Rouergue was the capital of Rouergue.

Villefranche-de-Rouergue is in the valley of the Aveyron river along the line that separates the "Causses" (limestone plateaus) from the "Ségala" geographical region.

There are mines of copper, lead, tin, iron and silver.

The Alzou river joins in the city, as a right tributary, the Aveyron river.

Villefranche-de-Rouergue has an area of , and its average altitude in the city is ; at the city hall, the altitude is ..

Villefranche-de-Rouergue is surrounded by the "communes" Saint-Rémy, Maleville, La Bastide-l'Évêque, Morlhon-le-Haut, Sanvensa, La Rouquette, Savignac and Toulonjac.

The climate of Villefranche-de-Rouergue, in the Köppen climate classification, is Cfb - Oceanic climate with template summers.

The inhabitants of Villefranche-de-Rouergue are known, in French, as "Villefranchois" (women: "Villefranchoises").

With a population of 11,822, Villefranche-de-Rouergue has a population density of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Villefranche-de-Rouergue

Villefranche-de-Rouergue forms with Toulonjac the urban area of Villefranche-de-Rouergue with a population of 12,644 inhabitants (2013) and an area of . This urban area is the centre of the metropolitan area of Villefranche-de-Rouergue, formed by 16 "communes" with a population of 20,180 inhabitants and an area of .

Villefranche-de-Rouergue is a subprefecture of the Aveyron department, the capital of the "arrondissement" of Villefranche-de-Rouergue and the administrative centre () of the canton of Villefranche-de-Rouergue, with 13,282 inhabitants .

It is part of the intercommunality "Le Grand Villefranchois" ().

Villefranche-de-Rouergue is twinned with:




