Auxerre

Auxerre is a French commune. It is in the northwest of the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region and is the prefecture of the Yonne department.

The city of Auxerre is in the centre of the Yonne department. The city is along the Yonne river, a tributary of the Seine river, that flows through the department from south to north.

It has an area of . Its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is .

Auxere is surrounded by many "communes": Augy, Champs-sur-Yonne, Chevannes, Escolives-Sainte-Camille, Jussy, Monéteau, Perrigny, Quenne, Saint-Georges-sur-Baulche, Vallan, Venoy, Villefargeau and Villeneuve-Saint-Salves.

The city of Auxerre is surrounded by the "communes": 

The Köppen climate classification type for the climate at Auxerre is an "Oceanic climate" (also known as Maritime Temperate climate) and of the subtype Cfb.

The average temperature for the year in Auxerre is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month, on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Auxerre is . The month with the most precipitation on average is December with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is April with an average of .

The inhabitants of Auxerre are known, in French, as "Auxerrois" (women: "Auxerroises").

With a population of 34,843, Auxerre has a population density of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Auxerre

Auxerre forms, together with other 2 "communes", the urban area of Auxerre with a population of 42,188 inhabitants (2013) and an area of . This urban area is the centre of the metropolitan area of Auxerre, formed by 68 "communes", with a population of 92,209 inhabitants (2013) and an area of .

Auxerre is the prefecture of the Yonne department, the capital of the "arrondissement" of Auxerre and the administrative centre () of four cantons:

It is part of the intercommunality "Auxerrois" ().

Auxerre is twinned with:




