Emirates (airline)

Emirates is an airline based in the United Arab Emirates. They are a subsidiary of The Emirates Group. They are the seventh biggest airline in the world, by number of passengers. Emirates Airline is the largest major airline in the Middle East. It is the national airline of Dubai, United Arab Emirates. It runs more than 2400 passenger flights per week from its hub at Dubai International Airport Terminal 3, to 108 places in 60 countries. It goes to countries on six continents. The flight to San Francisco is now served by a Boeing 777-300ER. Emirates is a part of The Emirates Group, which has more than 50,000 employees, and is owned fully by the Government of Dubai directly under the Investment Corporation of Dubai. Cargo activities are done by the Emirates Group's Emirates SkyCargo division.

Arsenal, The English Premier League (Barclay's Premier League) is sponsored by the Airline.

Emirates operate the following with cargo and passenger flights at October 2013;
Abidjan, Accra, Addis Ababa, Algiers, Cairo, Cape Town, Casablanca, Conakry (begins 27 October 2013), Dakar, Dar es Salaam, Djibouti (cargo), Durban, Eldoret (cargo), Entebbe, Harare, Johannesburg, Khartoum, Lagos, Lilongwe (cargo), Luanda, Lusaka, Mauritius, Nairobi, Seychelles, Tripoli, Tunis
Boston (begins 10 March 2014), Buenos Aires, Campinas (cargo), Chicago (cargo), Dallas, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, Rio de Janeiro, San Francisco, São Paulo, Seattle, Toronto, Washington

Ahmedabad, Almaty (cargo), Amman, Baghdad, Bahrain, Bangalore, Bangkok, Basra, Beijing, Beirut, Chennai, Chittagong (cargo), Clark, Cochin, Colombo, Delhi, Dhahran, Dhaka, Doha, Dubai, Erbil, Guangzhou, Hanoi (cargo), Ho Chi Minh, Hong Kong, Hyderabad, Islamabad, Jakarta, Jeddah, Kabul (begins 4 December 2013), Karachi, Kolkata, Kozhikode, Kuala Lumpur, Kuwait, Lahore, Maldives, Manila, Medina, Mumbai, Muscat, Osaka, Peshawar, Phuket, Riyadh, Sana'a, Seoul, Shanghai, Sialkot (begins 6 November 2014), Singapore, Taipei (begins 14 February 2014), Tehran, Thiruvanathapuram
Amsterdam, Athens, Barcelona, Birmingham, Copenhagen, Dublin, Düsseldorf, Frankfurt, Geneva, Glasgow, Gothenburg (cargo), Hamburg, Istanbul, Kiev (begins 16 January 2014), Larnaca, Lisbon, London, Lyon, Madrid, Malta, Manchester, Milan, Moscow, Munich, Newcastle, Nice, Paris, Prague, Rome, Saint Petersburg, Stockholm, Venice, Vienna, Warsaw, Zaragoza (cargo), Zurich
Adelaide, Auckland, Brisbane, Christchurch, Melbourne, Perth, Sydney

The Emirates passenger and cargo aircraft fleet is made up of the following widebody aircraft as of November 2013: 


