Islam

Islam () is a religion that believes in one god. All of its teachings and beliefs are written out in the Qur'an (also spelled Quran or Koran). People who follow Islam are called Muslims. They believe that the Qur'an was spoken to Muhammad by the angel Gabriel, and that it is the word of Allah. They view Muhammad as a prophet. Other beliefs and rules about what Muslims should do come from reports of what Muhammad taught and did. Muslims believe Muhammad was Allah's last prophet.

Muslims believe that there were many other prophets before Muhammad, including Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses and Jesus. They believe that all these prophets were given messages by God of the oneness of God to their communities at different times in history of mankind, but Satan, made the past communities deviate from the message of oneness and other social codes. Muslims believe that the content of the Qur'an (written in Arabic) is protected by Allah as mentioned in the Quran and is the final message of God for all of mankind until the day of judgment. 

Most Muslims belong to one of two groups. The most common is Sunni Islam (75–90% of all Muslims are Sunni Muslims). The second is Shia Islam (10–20% of all Muslims are Shias – also called Shiites). 

With about 1.8 billion followers (24% of the world's population), Islam is the second-largest religion in the world. Islam is also the fastest-growing religion in the world.

The country in the world where the most people are Muslim is Indonesia.

The word "Islam" comes from the Arabic word "ʾislām" (إسلام) which means "submission (to 
Allah)".

According to Islamic Tradition, there are five basic things that Muslims should do. They are called "The Five Pillars of Islam":

The Qur'an is the holy book of Islam. Muslims believe the Qur'an is the sayings of God.

Islam teaches that God revealed his message to Muhammad through angel Jibraeel who is the same angel which brought God`s message to the previous prophets. The Qur'an teaches Muslims to follow the right path by only doing good to please God. Muslims believe Allah alone decides who goes to Jannah (Heaven), and that doing good in this lifetime will bring them closer to God. 

The Qur'an has a total of 114 chapters. In each chapter, there are many verses. Many Muslims try to memorize the entire Qur'an. A Muslim who does this is called a Hafiz or Hafez.

Other important books in Islam are the Sunnah (which tell about Mohammad's life) and the Hadith (which are collections of things that Muslims believe Mohammad said).

Muslims pray in a place of worship called the mosque. A mosque is called a "masjid" in Arabic. Most masjids have at least one dome, and some have one or more towers. But a masjid does not need to have a dome or tower. 

Muslims take their shoes off before entering the masjid to pray. Prayer is one of the most important things that a Muslim does.

The Muslim is called to prayer five times a day. This call to prayer is called Adhan. The muezzin, a man chosen to make the call to prayer, uses a loudspeaker, which carries his voice to the people nearby. The call to prayer is often done out loud, in public, in Muslim countries. Being called to prayer is a normal part of daily life for most people in Muslim countries.
Sometimes, Muslims pray on a mat, which is called a "prayer mat" or "prayer rug" in English. Common Arabic names for the prayer mat include "sajjāda" and "namazlık". 

When it is time to pray, Muslims will figure out the direction of Qibla - the direction they are supposed to pray in, towards Mecca. They then roll out their prayer mat, and say their prayers to God.

According to Islamic teachings, Muslims must say "Peace be upon him" (PBUH or pbuh) whenever they hear Muhammad's name. In this way, they show respect to Muhammad.

In 2009, a study was done in 232 countries and territories. This study found that 23% of the global population or 1.57 billion people are Muslims. Of those, between 75% and 90% are Sunni and between ten and twenty five percent are Shi'a. A small part belong to other Islamic sects. In about fifty countries, more than half of the people are Muslim. Arabs account for around twenty percent of all Muslims worldwide. Islam has three holy sites; Jerusalem, Mecca and Medina.

Most Muslims live in Asia and Africa. Around 62% of the world's Muslims live in Asia, with over 683 million followers in Indonesia, Pakistan, India, and Bangladesh. In the Middle East, non-Arab countries such as Turkey and Iran are the largest Muslim-majority countries; in Africa, Egypt and Nigeria have the biggest Muslim communities.

Most estimates indicate that the People's Republic of China has about 20 to 30 million Muslims (1.5% to 2% of the population). However, data provided by the San Diego State University's International Population Center to U.S. News & World Report suggests that China has 65.3 million Muslims. Islam is the second largest religion after Christianity in many European countries,
and is slowly catching up to that status in the Americas.

Like with other religions, over time different movements have developed in Islam. These movements are based on different interpretations of the scriptures. The following sections list the most common movements.

Women have a great and honoured place in Islam, Quran has a chapter titled "Women" and another chapter titled "Mariam" which is a testament to the importance of women in Quran.

The Wife of Pharoah sought forgiveness and submitted herself to the belief in One God and was mentioned in the Quran for her change in faith and most merciful nature of Allah.

The blessed water well of Zam Zam was created for Hajra the wife of Prophet Ibrahim.

In the muslim pilgrimage of Umrah & Haj the ritual of Safa & Marwa has been included to remember the faith, trust and sacrifices made by a woman "Hajra"

Quran mentions the dress codes for men and women. Dress code is an important aspect to maintain morality in a healthy and sustainable society. For women the dress should cover her body but not necessary to cover their hands and face. Some women even cover their hands and faces, however that is a personal decision to protect their identity. This practice is done only because Muhammad's (pbuh) wives would do it so that nobody would recognize them. For men they must cover themselves from navel to knee in loose garments. Muslim women are not required to cover when they are with their mahrem family members, for example parents, spouses, children, siblings, etc. 

Men and women in Islam are required to lower their gaze towards the other gender, unless they are one of the exceptions mentioned above, such as family members.

Quran states clearly a woman's rights before, during and after a marriage and emphasises upon her rights during an unlikely event of divorce.

Quran clarifies the reward and respect of mothers as thrice that of fathers. It mentions that Allah loves men who treat their wives best and are just with them.

Quran states the rights of a woman in all cases of inheritance, so that a women is given her inheritance justly and timely.

In a Marriage if a man fears that his wife is not being loyal or is uprising then Men are instructed to verbally counsel her, if this is not enough then to seperate his bed, if this too doesnt work then he is allowed to cite/indicate (often wrongly misinterpeted as beat) their wives to authorities.

Quran is considered in Islam as a manual to all of humanity and its teachings to be implemented and shared by its readers.

Unfortunately today it is recited but not understood by most Readers.

Some people are afraid of Islam or do not like it. This is mostly because of attacks by Muslim extremists.

Some people have responded to these forms of criticism. Montgomery Watt and Norman Daniel say that some of the criticisms are the product of old myths and prejudice. Carl Ernst writes that Islamophobia has played a part in establishing what he calls "myths".

Muslim scholars like Muhammad Mohar Ali argue against claims of discrepancies in the Qur'an and allegations that Muhammad was unduly influenced by Judeo-Christian tradition.





