Ferdinand Marcos

Ferdinand Emmanuel Edralin Marcos (September 11, 1917 – September 28, 1989) was a Filipino politician and lawyer who served as President (1965-1986) and Prime Minister (1978-1981) of the Republic of the Philippines. He is a polarizing historical figure in both Philippines and the world. Marcos established an authoritarian regime that came under criticism for corruption and for its suppression of democratic processes and dictatorial nature. On the other hand, he achieved accomplishments most notably in infrastructure. 

Ferdinand Edralin Marcos was born on September 11, 1917, in Sarrat, Ilocos Norte, Philippines. His parents Mariano Marcos and Josefa Edralin, were both teachers from important families. He studied law at the University of the Philippines and later on top the bar examinations for lawyers., during which he was accused of assassinating his father's political rival. He represented himself as his own lawyer and he was later acquitted by the Supreme Court. 

During World War II, Marcos claimed that he had been the leader of "Ang Maharlika", guerrilla force in northern Luzon. After the war, he served as Ilocos Norte Representative (1949-1959) and as Senator of the Philippines (1958-1965). He was also Senate President (1963-1965) and then went on to become the President of the Philippines. As a president, he helped improve the infrastructure of the Philippines. He was also good at international diplomacy. He was probably the best and most intelligent and smartest president of the Philippines and many preferred his autocratic rule with iron fist. However, in other side, he may be the one of the most corrupt leaders such as Suharto or Kim Il-Sung or Kim Jong Il due to atrocities. A few years later, national problems like the insurgency by the communist movement and rebellion arose during his presidency: He declared Martial Law in September 1972 to institute peace and order and discipline. His style of leadership soon became dictatorial. Government greed, government bullying, despotism, nepotism, and violation of human rights abuses were abundant. The nation's masses who went against the government were sent to prison, tortured, raped or killed. People could not express themselves freely unless it was in favor of the Marcos family.

In 1983, he was accused in the assassination of his main rival and challenger, politician Benigno Aquino, Jr. but until today the killer remain unknown. The death of Benigno Aquino, Jr. caused many events, like a wrongful president vote. People became angry after and kicked him out with the help of the US during the peaceful EDSA revolution in February 1986. 

He and his wife Imelda Marcos were accused to have stolen billions of dollars of government funds and had it secretly sent to bank accounts in the United States, Switzerland, and other countries, as well as into fake companies under his name. However, until today Imelda Marcos was never sent to prison nor found guilty of stealing billions of dollars of government money and she remains free and was even elected in congress representing her home province of Leyte. Her son Ferdinand Marcos was back into politics and became a senator of the Philippines while her daughter Imee Marcos is currently the governor of Ilocos Norte.

During the people Power EDSA revolution he was flown to [Hawaii]] by a US plane instead of going to his hometown Paoay, Ilocos Norte. President Marcos died in Hawaii of heart, kidney and lung diseases. He was brought back to the Philippines and his remains still lie in a refrigerated crypt in Batac, Ilocos Norte until today because the current administration refuses to grant the former president a burial at the Libingan ng mga Bayani where other former presidents of the Philippines who died are buried. 


