Santo Domingo Este

Santo Domingo Este is a Dominican municipality and the provincial capital of the Santo Domingo province. It is on the eastern (left) side of the Ozama River.

Santo Domingo Este was part of the Distrito Nacional and of the Santo Domingo city until 2001 when the Santo Domingo province was created. The Santo Domingo Este was made the head municipality of this new province.

The municipality had, in , a total population of 891,952: 429,853 men and 462,099 women. The urban population was of the total population.

Santo Domingo Este is in the "Llano Costero del Caribe" ("Caribbean Coastal Plain"), a large plain in southeastern Dominican Republic where there are many savannas with grasses. There are not mountains in the province, only some very low hills.

The Ozama river forms the eastern and northern limits of the municipality; it is the only important river in the municipality.

The municipality has a total area of and has only one municipal district (a subdivision of a municipality): San Luis.

The altitude of Santo Domingo Este is above sea level.

The municipality of Santo Domingo Este has the municipality of Santo Domingo Norte and the Monte Plata Province to the north, the municipality of San Antonio de Guerra to the northeast, the municipality of Boca Chica to the east, the Caribbean Sea to the south and the Distrito Nacional to the west.

Santo Domingo Este, and the Santo Domingo province, has a tropical monsoonal climate (Köppen-Geiger classification: Am).

The average amount of rainfall for the year in the Santo Domingo province is . The month with the most precipitation on average is May with of rainfall, followed by October with .

The driest season is winter. The month with the least rainfall on average is March with an average of followed by February with an average of .

Santo Domingo Este is in a hot region; the average temperature for the year is . The warmest month, on average, is August with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The municipality of Santo Domingo Este has only one municipal district:

Some places to visit in Santo Domingo Este are:


