University of London

The University of London is a federal mega-university made up of 31 affiliates: 19 separate university institutions, and 12 research institutes. 

Its headquarters, Senate House, is in Malet Street in the Bloomsbury area of Camden. This is near University College London and the British Museum.

The University of London is the largest university in the UK by number of full-time students, with 135,090 campus-based students and over 45,000 in the University of London International Programmes. 

The university is not responsible for the teaching, the research or the individual students and staff of the constituent colleges. They are the responsibility of the colleges. The university is an administrative body responsible for standards, degree examinations and certification. 

The university was first established by a Royal Charter in 1836, which brought together in federation "London University" (now University College London) and "King's College" (now King's College London).

Graduates of the University of London may use the post-nominal letters 'Lond.' or 'Londin.' (both from "Londiniensis") after their degree abbreviations.

The university's biggest colleges are Birkbeck, Goldsmiths, King's College London, the London Business School, Queen Mary, Royal Holloway, SOAS, LSE and UCL.

Founded in 1836, the University at first comprised just two colleges. They were University College London (founded in 1826), which did not apply religious tests to its students, and King's College (founded in 1829), which admitted only members of the Church of England. Therefore, both University College and King's pre-date the University of London, which initially served solely as an examining body for the constituent colleges.

In 1858 the University expanded its role by offering the University of London International Programmes to candidates outside the colleges, the first of its kind in the country. A new headquarters at 6 Burlington Gardens, providing the university with exam halls and offices, was built to accommodate the new role. 

In 1878 the University became the first university in the UK to admit women on equal terms with men. Four female students obtained Bachelor of Arts degrees in 1880 and two obtained Bachelor of Science degrees in 1881, again the first in the country.


