Geography of Haiti

Haiti (; ) is a country in the Caribbean. It occupies the western three-eighths of Hispaniola; the Dominican Republic occupies the eastern five-eighths of the island.

The country has a total area of 27,750 km² of which 27,560 km² is land and 190 km² is water. Haiti has 1,771 km of coast-line and a 360 km-border with the Dominican Republic.

The limits of the country are the Dominican Republic to the east, the Atlantic Ocean to the north and the Caribbean Sea to the south and west. The capital, Port-au-Prince, is located on the west coast.

Cuba is to the northwest and Jamaica to the southwest of Haiti; the Winward Passage separates Cuba from Haiti (and Hispaniola) and the Jamaica Channel separates Haiti from Jamaica.

There are two large peninsulas: the Northwestern on the Atlantic Ocean, and the Southern peninsulas on the Caribbean Sea. The Northwestern, or just Northern, Peninsula () is also known as the Saint-Nicolas Peninsula; it was the first part of the Hispaniola visited by Christopher Columbus on 1492. The historical name of the Southern Peninsula () was Tiburón Peninsula.

Between those two large peninsulas there is a gulf (a very large bay): the Gulf of Gonâve. It is named so after the Gonâve Island that is in the middle of the gulf. It was called also Gulf of Léogane after the city of Léogane, one of the oldest in Haiti.

Haiti has a tropical climate but modified by elevation and the "Trade winds" (winds that come from the northeast, from the Atlantic Ocean, full of water vapour), which blow from the Atlantic all year long. In low lands with mountains to the northeast, the climate is arid (dry) because the trade winds leave their water in those mountains rather than the valleys and plains.

There are two rain seasons, in spring and fall to the south, and in spring and winter to the north. From June to November (mainly from August to October), tropical storms and hurricanes are frequent and can do much damage in the country.

There are several smaller islands and cays that are part of Haiti. The largest islands are:

The chains of mountains show a direction northwest-southeast, except in the Southern Peninsula where they have a direction west-east. The mountains are separated by valleys with the same general direction.

From north to south, the main mountain ranges and valleys are:

The river "Artibonite" is the longest river of the island and of Haiti. It is 321 km long (68 km in the Dominican Republic, 253 km in Haiti). Its sources are in the Cordillera Central (Dominican Republic) and flows into the Gulf of Gonâve. Its watershed has an area of 6,399 km² in Haiti and 2,614 km² in the Dominican Republic.

Another important Haitian river is the "Trois Rivières" (Three Rivers). It is 150 km long and its sources are in the Massif du Nord and flows into the Atlantic Ocean, near the city of Port-de-Paix.

The largest lake of Haiti is the "Étang Saumâtre" (also known as "Lake Azuei"); it is eastern end of the "Cul-de-Sac" valley. It is a saline lake with an area of around 170 km².

Others lakes are "Étang de Miragoâne" (25 km²), of fresh water at 4 km southeast from the city of Miragoâne; and "Trou Caïman" (16.2 km²), a small lake at 6 km from Étang Saumâtre.


