Kids Help Line

The Kids Help Line is a counselling service in Australia for people who are between 5 and 25 years old. Young people use the Kids Help Line to talk about problems in their lives. These problems range from fighting with friends and breaking up with a partner to suicidal thoughts and being hurt or abused. 

The Kids Help Line employs about 110 people to work as counsellors. They are based in Brisbane so all the calls that people make to the Kids Help Line go through to a call centre in Brisbane. These counsellors listen to nearly 6,000 calls from young people each week.

The Kids helpline is run by BoysTown. Most of the money needed for it to run is raised through lotteries held by BoysTown. The Australian Government also helps by giving some money and Optus is their biggest sponsor.

Kids Help Line was opened for taking calls on the 25 March 1991. On the first day more than 3,200 young people rang up to ask for help. By the day 17, 122,000 thousand calls had been made. Not many of these calls were able to be answered. After a year of been open for people to call the Kids Help Line had answered 75,000 calls.

Kids Help Line was added into different states one at a time. In 1993 it was open in every state in Australia. In 1999 "Email Counselling" was offered for the first time and in May 2000 "Web Counselling" was offered for the first time.

Since the first call was taken in 1991, the Kids Help Line has been contacted more than 7.5 million (7,500,000) times.

The Kids Help Line offers three different ways of communicating with them.

Calling 1800 55 1800 anywhere in Australia will let you talk to a counsellor from the Kids Help Line. A call can be made at any time of the day, on any day in the week. This is the quickest way of getting help. If the problem is really bad the Kids Help Line say that calling them is the best way to get help. Calling this number in Australia is free using a home phone, payphone or Optus or Virgin mobile phone.

This is called "Web Counselling". Web Counselling allows the person who is wanting help to talk over the Internet to a counsellor. This is done by Instant Messaging each other. What that means is the messages are sent from one computer to the other very slowly (similar to Skype and Windows Live Messenger). Web Counselling is available between 3pm and 10pm Monday to Friday and between 10am and 5pm on Saturday & Sunday (Queensland time).

A person needing help may send an email to the Kids Help Line and then wait for a response. This is the slowest way of getting help because it sometimes takes a counsellor up to two weeks to reply to each email.



