Derivative (mathematics)

In mathematics, the derivative is a way to represent rate of change, that is - the amount by which a function is changing at one given point. For functions that act on the real numbers, it is the slope of the tangent line at a point on a graph. The derivative is often written using "dy over dx" (meaning the difference in y divided by the difference in x. The "d"'s are not variable, and therefore cannot be cancelled out.

The derivative of y with respect to x is defined as the change in y over the change in x, as the distance between formula_2 and formula_3 becomes infinitely small (infinitesimal). In mathematical terms,
That is, as the distance between the two x points (h) becomes closer to zero, the slope of the line between them comes closer to resembling a tangent line.

Derivatives of linear functions (functions of the form "a" "x" + "b" with no quadratic or higher terms) are constant. That is, the derivative in one spot on the graph will remain the same on another.

When the dependent variable y directly takes x's value (y=x), the slope of the line is 1 in all places, so formula_5 regardless of where the position is.

When y modifies x's number by adding or subtracting a constant value, the slope is still one because the change in x and y do not change if the graph is shifted up or down. That is, the slope is still 1 throughout the entire graph, so its derivative is also 1.

Power functions (e.g. formula_6) behave differently than linear functions because their slope varies (because they have an exponent).

Power functions, in general, follow the rule that formula_7. That is, if we give a the number 6, then formula_8

Another possibly not so obvious example is the function formula_9. This is essentially the same because 1/x can be simplified to use exponents:

In addition, roots can be changed to use fractional exponents where their derivative can be found:

An exponential is of the form formula_15 where formula_16 and formula_17 are constants and formula_18 is a function of formula_19. The difference between an exponential and a polynomial is that in a polynomial formula_19 is raised to some power whereas in an exponential formula_21 is in the power.

formula_22

Find formula_23.

formula_24

formula_25

formula_26

formula_27

Therefore,

formula_28

The derivative of logarithms is the reciprocal:
Take, for example, formula_30. This can be reduced to (by the properties of logarithms):
The logarithm of 5 is a constant, so its derivative is 0. The derivative of log(x) is formula_32. So,

The cosine function is the derivative of the sine function, while the derivative of cosine is negative sine (provided that x is measured in radians):

Derivatives can be broken up into smaller parts where they are manageable (as they have only one of the above function characteristics), for example:

A function's derivative can be used to search for the maximums and minimums of the function by searching for places where its slope is zero.

Derivatives are used in Newton's method which helps find zeros (roots) of a function.




