January 31 – February 2, 2011 North American winter storm

The Groundhog Day blizzard of 2011 was a large blizzard that struck parts of Canada, Mexico, and the United States between 31 January 2011 and 2 February 2011. The blizzard was also called the 2011 Groundhog Day Blizzard because it happened close to Groundhog Day. The storm dumped over of snow from Oklahoma City to Chicago and Boston. An ice storm south of the blizzard affected many areas from Dallas to Indianapolis to just north of New York City. The ice storm caused over 1 inch of ice on most of these areas. Heavy rain fell from Little Rock to New York City. At the same time, severe thunderstorms and tornadoes were seen across Texas and Alabama. A tornado watch was issued for Alabama, where an EF1 tornado dropped down. 

The storm started as severe thunderstorms and tornadoes happened in Texas. It grew larger and turned into a mix of blizzard, ice storm, heavy rain, and severe weather. On 1 February, the blizzard reached from Oklahoma City up to Chicago. Heavy snow and strong winds were seen with the storm. Over night, the storm moved through Chicago to Boston. The blizzard caused more than 14 inches of snow on Oklahoma City, Chicago, and Boston. The ice storm produced up to 1 inch of ice. On February 2nd, the storm moved out to sea. This storm has impacted more than 10 states.

Texas had severe weather from the storm with tornadoes, hail, and severe thunderstorms.

Oklahoma was hit by a blizzard and icestorm on the south part of the storm on 1 February. The blizzard caused more than 14 inches of snow in Tulsa and Oklahoma City as well as strong winds. The blizzard ended by the night of 1 February.

Kansas got over 14 inches of snow in Kansas City and Topeka.

Nebraska got more than 14 inches of snow in Omaha. There was less than 1 inch in North Platte. There was extreme cold west of the blizzard. 

Iowa got more than 14 inches of snow in Des Moines.

The blizzard caused over 14 inches of snow in Chicago. The ice storm caused about 1/2 inch of ice in the Southeast. There was about 1/2 inch of rain there.

Most of Indiana saw an ice storm. There was heavy rain in the Southeast and a blizzard in the Northwest. The blizzard dumped several inches of heavy snow on the Northwest part of Indiana. The ice storm dumped 1 inch of ice on Indianapolis.

Half of Ohio saw an ice storm and half saw heavy rain. The ice storm caused 1 inch of ice in Cleveland. The heavy rain produced 1 inch of rain on Columbus.

Most of Pennsylvania saw heavy rain. Much of the northwest part had an ice storm. Only the most Northwest part of the state saw a blizzard.
The heavy rain caused 1 inch of rain on Philadelphia, and Harrisburg. The ice storm dumped 1 inch of ice north of Pittsburgh. Pittsburgh also had 1 inch of heavy rain. The blizzard caused several inches of heavy snow on the far Northwest.

New York state saw heavy rain, the ice storm and the blizzard. The heavy rain caused 1 inch of rain on New York City. The ice storm caused 1 inch of ice on Albany. There were also several inches of snow in Albany. The blizzard dumped over 14 inches of snow in Buffalo.


