Haute couture

Haute couture (pronounced '') is a French term for high fashion. It refers to the creation of exclusive custom-fitted clothing. The term refers to: 

"Haute couture" is made to order for a specific customer. It is usually made from high-quality, expensive fabric and sewn with extreme attention to detail and finish by the most experienced and capable seamstresses, often using time-consuming, hand-executed techniques. "Couture" is a common abbreviation of "haute couture".

In France, "haute couture" is "une appellation juridiquement protégée" (a legally protected name). It may only be used by firms which meet certain well-defined standards. However, the term is also used to describe all high-fashion custom-fitted clothing in other 'fashion capitals' such as Milan, London, New York, Tokyo and Madrid. 

The "couturier" Charles Frederick Worth (13 October 1826–10 March 1895), is widely considered the father of "haute couture" as it is known today. Although born in Lincolnshire, England, Worth made his mark in the French fashion industry. He revolutionized how dressmaking was organised. Worth made it so the dressmaker became an "artist": a fashion designer. He created one-of-a-kind designs to please his titled or rich customers. More importantly, he prepared designs which were shown on live models at the "House of Worth". Clients selected a design, specified colours and fabrics, and had a version tailor-made in Worth's workshop. Worth combined individual tailoring with a standardization more characteristic of the ready-to-wear clothing industry, which was also developing during this period.

To earn the right to call itself a couture house and to use the term "haute couture", members of the "Chambre syndicale de la haute couture" must follow these rules:


Membership is seldom given. Outside the "Chambre syndicale" are many successful fashion houses which deal in "prêt-à-porter" (the French term for ready-to-wear fashion). They have their own "Chambre syndicale du prêt-à-porter".



