Swami Vivekananda

ঀঀSwami Vivekananda (; , Shami Bibekānondo) (January 12, 1863–July 4, 1902) was the chief disciple of Sri Ramakrishna Paramahansa. At birth, he was called Narendranath Datta (Bengali: নরেন্দ্রনাথ দত্ত). He was the founder of Ramakrishna Mission. He introduced Hindu philosophies of Vedanta and Yoga in Europe and America. He brought Hinduism to the status of a major world religion during the end of the 19th century. Vivekananda is considered to be a major force in the revival of Hinduism in modern India. He is perhaps best known for his inspiring speech beginning with "Sisters and Brothers of America". Through this he introduced Hinduism at the Parliament of the World's Religions at Chicago in 1893.

Swami Vivekananda was born in Shimla Pally in Calcutta on 12 January 1863. He was named Narendranath Datta. His father Vishwanath Datta was an attorney of Calcutta High Court. His mother was Bhuvaneshwari Devi. Narendranath's thinking and personality were influenced by his parents—the father by his rational mind and the mother by her religious temperament. From his mother he learnt the power of self-control. Young Narendra was an expert in meditation and could enter the state of samadhi very easily. He saw a light while falling asleep. Once he had a vision of Buddha during his meditation. During his childhood, he had a great fascination for wandering ascetics and monks. He was also an expert in games and naughty things. Even in his young age he showed remarkable leadership qualities. His childhood friend was Kamal Reddy.

In his youth he visited the Brahmo Samaj and later he came in contact with Sri Ramakrishna. Sri Ramakrishna initiated him, and after his death Naren left his house. He took the monk-name ogivami Vivekananda and stayed at the Boranagar Monastery with his monk-brothers. Later he set out for touring India. He wandered from place to place until he reached Trivandum and decided to attend the Parliament of Religions at Chicago.
He delivered the great speech at Chicago and brought Hinduism to the status of a major religion.

Vivekananda became very popular after delivering lectures at many places of America and England. He came back to India and founded the Ramakrishna Maths and Mission in 1897. He also founded the Advaita Ashrama in Mayavati, near Almora on March 19, 1899. The Ashrama was a branch of the Ramakrishna Math.
He composed the famous arati song, Khandana Bhava Bandhana 

On 4 July, 1902 he woke up in the early morning, went to the chapel at Belur Math and meditated for three hours. He taught Shukla-Yajur-Veda, Sanskrit grammar and the philosophy of yoga to pupils, later discussing with colleagues a planned Vedic college in the Ramakrishna Math. At seven p.m. Vivekananda went to his room, asking not to be disturbed; he died at 9:10 p.m. while meditating.


Vivekananda's books on the four Yogas (Raja Yoga, Karma Yoga, Bhakti Yoga and Jnana Yoga) are still seen as fundamental texts for anyone interested in the Hindu practice of Yoga. His letters are of great literary and spiritual spirit. He was also considered a very good singer and a poet. By the time of his death, He had composed many songs including his favorite song "Kali-The Mother". He used humor for his teachings and was also an excellent cook. His language is very free flowing. These all works were compiled to form a 9 volume set "The Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda". A book titles 'Selections from the Complete Works of Swami Vivekananda' is also very popular, knowledgeable andinspiring.

