Euglena

Euglena is a large genus of unicellular protists, which have both plant and animal characteristics.

All are motile by means of a flagellum (animal characteristic). Most have chloroplasts (alga and plant characteristic).

Euglenids are believed to descend from an ancestor that took up green algae by secondary endosymbiosis.

Over 1,000 species of "Euglena" have been described, and there are more to be discovered. Marin "et al." (2003) revised the genus to include several species without chloroplasts, formerly classified as "Astasia" and "Khawkinea".
When acting as a heterotroph (animal), the "Euglena" surrounds a particle of food and consumes it by phagocytosis. When acting as an autotroph, the "Euglena" uses chloroplasts to produce sugars by photosynthesis. 

The number and shape of chloroplasts within "Euglena" varies greatly. "Euglena" are able to move through aquatic environments by using a large flagellum for locomotion. To detect light, the cell has an eyespot, a primitive organelle that filters sunlight into light-detecting, photo-sensitive structures at the base of the flagellum; allowing only certain wavelengths of light to hit it. 

This photo-sensitive area detects the light that is able to be transmitted through the eyespot. When such light is detected, the "Euglena" may shift its position to get better photosynthesis. 

The motility of Euglena also allows hunting. Most "Euglena" are considered mixotrophs: autotrophs in sunlight and heterotrophs in the dark. "Euglena" do not have plant cell walls, but have a pellicle instead. The pellicle is made of protein bands that spiral down the length of the "Euglena" and lie beneath the plasma membrane.

"Euglena" can survive in fresh and salt water. In low moisture conditions, "Euglena" forms a protective wall around itself and lies dormant as a spore until environmental conditions improve. "Euglena" can also survive in the dark by storing paramylon granules inside the chloroplast.

"Euglenas" reproduce asexually, and there has been no evidence of sexual reproduction. Reproduction includes transverse division and longitudinal division, which both occur in the active and encysted forms. 


