Nico di Angelo

Nico di Angelo is a fictional character in Rick Riordan's "Percy Jackson & The Olympians" and "The Heroes of Olympus" series and in The Hidden Oracle. (So far, it is not confirmed if he will make another appearance in the future books of the Trials of Apollo series.) In the series, he is the demigod son of Hades and mortal Maria di Angelo. As such, Nico has extraordinary powers of necromancy and the power to command the dead; he is a son of one of the "Big Three" Greek gods, the other two being Hades' younger brothers Poseidon and Zeus. Nico is chronologically over seventy years old as a result of his prolonged stay in the Lotus Casino in Las Vegas, an enchanted hotel where one does not age and time does not pass at its normal pace. But he was ten years old in the Titans Curse. He and his sister, Bianca di Angelo were placed in the Lotus Hotel and Casino sometime after the end of World War II, but were rescued by a man in a suit (the Fury, Alecto) after some time.

Nico is said to have shaggy, messy black hair, olive skin and dark brown eyes. After his time in the maze he is described as having a pale complexion. He usually wears dark clothing and is also mentioned on several occasions to be wearing an aviator's jacket. By the end of "The Battle of the Labyrinth", he also wears a skull ring, a gift from his deceased sister Bianca.

In "The Titan's Curse", Nico is a composed kid who loves a trading card game called Mythomagic. However, since his sister's death in "The Titan's Curse" at the hands of a defective Talos, he has a hateful resentment toward Percy. He later thinks Mythomagic is a stupid game, and burns all his cards in a fire. He becomes more sullen and solitary, saying that "only the dead respect him... and only out of fear". He believes that he will never be accepted with the living, but forgives Percy after Bianca tells him that it wasn't Percy's fault that she died. He also accepts the small figurine of Hades that Bianca wanted him to have before she died in "The Titan's Curse". In the fifth book, he brings Percy to his father to get information that proves to be the least his father can give, and his father ends up putting Percy in a dungeon. However, Nico rescues Percy from the dungeon and takes him to the River Styx where Percy becomes almost invincible. In the end of "The Last Olympian", Nico convinces his father, Hades, to help the other gods fight in the war against the Lord of Time, Kronos, and his army, and plays a major role in the victory. The relationship between Percy and Nico becomes close for they both might have been the child of the Great Prophecy.

Nico Di Angelo's fatal flaw is holding grudges, as Bianca tells him. In his case, it can lead to not wanting help or not asking to be saved in deadly situations because he does not like someone. Examples are his not wanting to be helped by Percy, even when Geryon was going to sell him to the Titans and not wanting to go back in the Labyrinth with them. Bianca shares this with him, as she also had the same fatal flaw in life, although this did not lead to her death. Bianca also says that holding grudges is the demigods of Hades' fatal flaw. In the fifth book, Nico tells his father, Hades, that he is holding a grudge that could end up killing the Olympians and the campers.

In "The House of Hades", Nico is forced by Cupid to reveal that he had a crush on Percy Jackson. This reveals that he is homosexual. In The Blood of Olympus, he later says that he does not feel that way anymore and that he had been young and impressionable at the time, there are indications during The House of Hades that he still loves Percy.

Nico is ten years old and first appears with his sister, Bianca, in a military school called Westover Hall in Bar Harbor, Maine. They are sought out by Grover Underwood, the satyr, who believes them to be two very powerful unknown half-bloods. Nico seems to be very interested in Mythomagic, a game about Greek mythology. When his sister Bianca accepts Artemis's proposal to become a Hunter, Nico gets angry at her for "abandoning" him. Percy finds Nico eavesdropping on Bianca and Zöe Nightshade (one of the Hunters of Artemis, a daughter of Atlas), and Nico makes Percy to promise to keep his sister safe. He does not appear again until the end of the book, where Percy explains to him that Bianca died to save the others on the quest. He also creates a large crack in the ground to swallow up the skeletons that were chasing Percy. He immediately turns on Percy, telling him he hates him, and reminds him of the oath he took to keep Bianca safe. Nico is last seen running into the woods at night, after screaming at Percy.

Nico is supposedly eleven years old in this book. He is first seen talking with an unknown ghost who is trying to tell Nico how to trade his sister's soul for another soul, when Percy is sent a collect Iris Message sent by Bianca Di Angelo, Nico's sister. It is revealed in this book that Nico can summon the dead. Nico is then seen when Percy, Annabeth, Grover, and Tyson visit Triple G Ranch, where Percy then saves Nico from being sent to the Titans. Nico, still angry at Percy, finally understands that it was Bianca's choice to go into the Talos robot, and that he shouldn't be mad at Percy. The others leave Nico at the Ranch, where he supposedly meets King Minos (in ghost form) again, who convinces him to go back into the Labyrinth to supposedly save Percy and the others.

He is next seen being dragged into Daedalus' workshop by one empousa and two Laistrygonians, in chains, after being tricked by King Minos. He escapes with Percy, Annabeth, and Rachel Elizabeth Dare, who have to go back into the Labyrinth to find Grover and Tyson, who had stayed behind to look for Pan, god of the Wild. Along the way, they see Kronos in the form of Luke, and Nico, in a desperate attempt to save everyone, shows his true powers, and makes it known to Kronos that he is a son of Hades. They meet the wild god Pan, who gives everyone except for Nico a cryptic future reading and then vanishes. After they get out of the Labyrinth, a full-fledged battle erupts between the Titans and Camp Half-Blood, in which Nico summons a dozen undead soldiers to fight the dracanae, passing out in the process. He is revived with nectar and ambrosia, and he states that summoning that many soldiers required a lot of energy. After the campfire, he is seen talking with the ghost of his sister Bianca. He then tells Percy, who came out to see what was going on, that he did not belong at camp, but instead in the Underworld, but would train there instead. He also goes to search for his mother. He is last seen on Percy's apartment fire escape giving Percy news on Daedalus and a way to beat Luke for good. Before mentioning it, Nico is distracted by Percy's blue birthday cake, and Percy invites him in to talk.

Nico is supposedly twelve years old in this book. His theory to gain an edge over the Titans is to make Percy invincible by having him bathe in the River Styx, similar to the myth of Achilles. It is shown that after Bianca died, Hades feels he has no competent child, repeatedly mentioning that Bianca could do a better job at fulfilling their father's demands than Nico. It is also revealed that the lawyer who removed the children from the Lotus Casino was Hades' lead fury, Alecto, in disguise.

Although he does not appear in the book, he is mentioned by Annabeth to be searching for Percy.

Nico appears in the beggining of the book, He was visiting his half-sister Hazel who was showing Percy (after losing his memory) Camp Jupiter. Unfortunately Nico lied to Percy about knowing him after he found out he had his memories taken away. Nico reveals that he's an ambassador for Pluto at the roman camp. By the end of the book when Percy regains his memories his ideas were to "strangle that kid out for pretending he didn't know him".

Though Nico was inside of a jar (after getting kidnapped) during most of The Mark of Athena, he does get rescued by Piper, Jason and Percy. When Percy and Annabeth are holding for dear life at a chasm that lead to Tartarus, Nico tries to save them before Percy and Annabeth fall into Tartarus.

Nico admits his feelings for Percy when he was confronted by Cupid. This makes Nico the first demigod acknowledged as homosexual in the series. He shares this secret with Jason, who was with him at the time.

Nico helps transport the Athena Parhtenos to Camp Half-blood to halt the attack from the Camp Jupiter. He is joined by Reyna and Coach Hedge. The band shadow traveled halfway around the world, causing Nico to lose a lot of his strength and "fade". When facing Bryce Lawrence, it was demonstrated that Nico could turn people into ghostly specters.

Hades was also alluded to have been aware about Nico's romantic feelings for Percy during one of his conversations with his son. Hades potentionally gives Nico his blessing, telling him he'd prepare a room for him in the Underworld. He also informs Nico that he wants him to be happy, and that he is proud of his son.

Upon arriving at Camp Half-Blood, Nico assists on destroying Octavian's catapults and is joined by Will Solace, who he bickered with all through out. This amuses Cecil and Lou Ellen, who were with them. After the battle, Will has expressed interest on befriending Nico, and maybe much more. Whenever Will touches Nico, it was stated that it sent electrical spikes through his body, as well as feeling what Nico claims are 'skeletal butterflies resurrecting in his stomach,' and the two flirt quite a bit, with Will expressing his dismay that Nico wasn't helping him nurse the wounded at the infirmary. When Nico answers the door to his cabin and sees Jason Grace he momentarily mistakes him for Will, which caused him to feel disappointed, and then ashamed of being disappointed.

Nico finally confesses his feelings for Percy, while Annabeth smiles approvingly at the reveal. He labels Percy as no longer his type, and walks towards a waving Will Solace, the boy he potentially chooses.

Nico's sword is made of Stygian Iron, which will kill monsters, and, unlike the other metals of Celestial Bronze and Imperial Gold, is capable of harming mortals. The metal, when being forged, is cooled in the River Styx, making it indestructible. It is implied that only beings of the Underworld, such as Hades and his children, are to use a Stygian iron weapon. The sword helps him channel his power to control and summon the dead, along with draining an enemy's soul to reinforce his sword's power. He can also use it to create fissures in the ground, trapping anyone unlucky to get caught in the underworld, like he did to Minos. Nico being a very powerful demigod he has many powers and he is aware that “With great power... comes a great need to take a nap," as he finds out when putting to sleep all of the skeleton guards in the Palace of Hades during his and Percy's escape from imprisonment during the Last Olympian. 




