Mâcon

Mâcon is a "commune" in the Saône-et-Loire department in the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region in east-central France. It is the "préfecture" (capital) of the department.

Even if Mâcon is the capital of the department, it is only the second largest city in population after Chalon-sur-Saône.

The Celts from the Aedui (people that lived between the Saône and Loire rivers) had an oppidum and a river port in the present place of Mâcon. This settlement was called Matisco by Julius Caesar.

Mâcon is the southernmost capital city in the region of Bourgogne-Franche-Comté. It is at north of Lyon and from Paris.

The city lies on the western (left) side of the Saône river, on the border with the Ain department.

It has an area of . Its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is .

Since 1972, the "commune" of Mâcon is divided in two parts: the southern part, including the old city, and the northern part. Both parts are surrounded by the "communes":

The Köppen climate classification type for the climate at Charnay-lès-Mâcon, less than to the west of Mâcon and where is the local airport, is an "Oceanic climate" (also known as Maritime Temperate climate) and of the subtype "Cfb".

The average temperature for the year in Charnay-lès-Mâcon is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month, on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Charnay-lès-Mâcon is . The month with the most precipitation on average is October with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is August with an average of .

The inhabitants of Mâcon are known, in French, as "Mâconnais" (women: "Mâconnaises ").

With a population of 33,456, Mâcon has a population density of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Mâcon

Mâcon is a prefecture of the Saône-et-Loire department since 1800. It is also the capital of the "arrondissement" of Mâcon and the administrative centre () of two cantons:

It is part of the intercommunality "Mâconnais Beaujolais Agglomération" ().

Mâcon is twinned with:

Some interesting places in Mâcon are:





