F.C. Red Bull Salzburg

F.C. Red Bull Salzburg is a football club which plays in Austria's top league, the Austrian Bundesliga. The club was known as SV Austria Salzburg until 2005, when the club was bought by the Red Bull Company. They renamed the club and changed the colours from the traditional violet to red and white. Also, the company's logo was added. The club runs two academies in Ghana and in Brazil. The homeground of the club is the EM Stadion Wals - Siezenheim which was opened in 2003 and renovated for the European Championship 2008.

The football club was started on September 13, 1933 by the unification of the two clubs FC Rapid Salzburg and FC Hertha Salzburg. Background was to form a second club from Salzburg which was able to play successfully in the newly formed league with Upper Austria. During the time of the Nazi occupation of Germany the club was able to compete with SAK 1914. As Salzburgs champion they played for the promotion to the Gauliga Ostmark, the highest class then. But they failed. During the Second World War they formed together with 1. Salzburger SK 1919 and SAK 1914 the Fußballgemeinschaft Salzburg. After the end of the waar they started again as SV Austria Salzburg.

1952/53 they reached for the first time the A-Liga, the name of the highest division of Austrian football then, beating Kapfenberger SV in the play offs. Three seasons they played there but came back 1959. To stay in the league they signed Erich Probst, who was the second best scorer in the FIFA World Cup 1954. In only 20 matches he scored 14 goals so Austria stayed in the league. He was also the first player of SV Austria who played for the Austrian national football team. The next years were characterized by ups and downs. The first success was the second place in the 1971/72 season. The same year they made the Lehener Stadion to their homeground.

The best years of the club were between 1990 and 1997. In these years, the club reached the championship three times and played in the UEFA Cup final 1993/94 versus Inter Mailand. In 2005 the Red Bull Company bought the club because the owners were having problems with money. Some traditional fans left the club and started a new club under the old name SV Austria Salzburg. Ever since 2005, the club has been named FC Red Bull alzburg.
One of the aims of the new owners was to form a team which can play in the UEFA Champions League regularly. This was not reached but the new club was nevertheless successful. In the national league they reached four titles and were four times second. In the 2009/10 UEFA euro League the club won the group stage with 6 victories over FC Villarreal, Lazio Rom and Lewski Sofia. In the Round of 32 they lost versus Standard Lüttich. Also the next two Euro League group stages were reached. In the 2011/12 Euro League they reached the second place in the group stage behind Atletico Bilbao.

In the 2012/13 Championsleague they failed to beat FC Düdelingen from Luxenbourg. So the team was changed and new players were bought. In the league season they finished as 2nd. In 2013/14 the team became very successful, they became first 11 points before the second. In the Championsleague qualification they failed versus Fenerbahce Istanbul but they qualified for the Group stage, which they ended with 6 wins in 6 matches.

Till 2015 they earned 2 titels and 2 wins in the Austrian Cup.

In UEFA matches the club is called FC Salzburg due to sponsorship reasons. 
"As of 18 November 2013."

 

Look "FC Liefering"

Austrian Bundesliga

Austrian Cup

Austrian Supercup

UEFA Cup

"<nowiki>*</nowiki> as Austria Salzburg"




After the Red Bull take over of SV Austria Salzburg some group of fans were unhappy, because the new club has other colours and did not accept the history of the club. After some negotiations these fans left the club and founded a new one under the name SV (Sportverein) Austria Salzburg. The new club is playing in the Regionalliga West together with the Red Bull Juniors.

In the meantime Red Bull Salzburg has 44 official fan clubs all over Austria.



