Penang

Penang (also known Pulau Pinang) is a state in Malaysia. It is on the northwestern part of Malaysia. The capital city of Penang is George Town. by the Strait of Malacca. A resident of Penang is known as a Penangite. It has two parts – Penang Island and Butterworth on the mainland. The state of Penang is next to Kedah to the north and east, and Perak to the south.

From the 14th century Portuguese traders set foot on the island of Penang. They were looking for spices to sell.

Then, many years later Chinese traders arrived and it was then the island was first put onto a map. On 17 July 1786, Captain Francis Light, an English sailor landed on the island. He built a fort called Fort Cornwallis, On 12 August 1786, Light renamed the island Prince of Wales Island after the Prince of Wales. He named the new town George Town in honour of King George III of England.

Penang is a geographically divided into two sections:

The geography of Seberang Perai is mostly flat. It has a long coastline, the majority of which is lined with mangrove. 

The island of Penang is composed of two districts:
The north and east of Penang island is very built up. Here is where most of the population live. 

This includes: Batu Ferringhi, Tanjong Bungah, Tanjong Tokong and Georgetown

The north west and middle of the island is covered with thick forest. 

In 2012 artist Ernest Zacharevic created a series of 6 wall paintings. Since these paintings, the street art scene has grown.

There are lots of examples around Georgetown. Many people come to the city just to see them!

The population of Penang is 1,902,116 as of 2016.[3] It is very crowded with lots of construction going on.

Penang Island has a population of 711,102 in 2016.

Penang Island is the most populated island in Malaysia.

There are many people and cultures in Penang.

Malays, Chinese, Indian (Malaysian Indian), Europeans, Australians, Americans, Indonesians, Myanmar, Vietnam, Thailand, and South Asian nations.

Because of this, Penang is very famous for its delicious food! Other clues that tell us where people moved here from include the buildings and the languages spoken. 




