Sweden

Sweden () is a Nordic country in the part of Europe called Scandinavia. Its neighbors are Finland and Norway. Sweden is also connected to Denmark in the south by a bridge. It is a developed country. It is famous for its welfare state. People who live in Sweden are called Swedes.

Sweden's capital city is Stockholm. Sweden is a constitutional monarchy because it has a king, Carl XVI Gustaf, but he does not have any real power. Sweden is a parliamentary state meaning that the government is elected by the parliament which is appointed by the people. The country is democratically ruled by a government headed by an elected prime minister. Stefan Löfven was elected Prime Minister in September 2014. He took office in October 2014.

The population of Sweden is about 9.9 million people. 

Sweden has an official majority language, (called "svenska "in Swedish). Sweden has five official minority languages, Finnish, Yiddish, Sami, Meänkieli and Romani.

Sweden became a member of the European Union on 1 January 1995. It is not a member of the Eurozone. Sweden has not begun to use the euro as currency. This is because the people have voted against this. The currency remains the Swedish krona (Swedish crown).

Sweden has 25 historical provinces ("landskap"). They are found in three different regions:
Norrland in the North, Svealand, the central region, and Götaland in the South.

Sweden has been a country for a thousand years. In the Middle Ages Sweden had the same king as Denmark and Norway. In the early 16th century Sweden got its own king, Gustav Vasa. During the 17th century Sweden was a great power. Sweden had taken Estonia, Latvia and Finland and parts of Norway, Germany and Russia. In the 18th century Sweden became weaker and lost these places. In the early 19th century Sweden's king died without an heir and the Swedish parliament voted for Jean Baptiste Bernadotte as the new king. Bernadotte fought Denmark and made them allow Norway to enter a personal union with Sweden. 

This was Sweden's last war and Sweden has not been at war for 200 years. In 1905, the Swedish-Norwegian personal union was dissolved. In many wars, including World War I and the Cold war, the country was neutral, meaning it did not take sides. During World War II, it traded with both the British and the Germans in order to protect its neutrality.

Sweden is divided into twenty-one counties. They are Stockholm, Uppsala, Södermanland, Östergötland, Jönköping, Kronoberg, Kalmar, Gotland, Blekinge, Skåne, Halland, Västra Götaland, Värmland, Örebro, Västmanland, Dalarna, Gävleborg, Västernorrland, Jämtland, Västerbotten and Norrbotten.

Sweden has been Christian for a thousand years. Sweden is traditionally a Protestant country, but it is now one of the least religious countries in the world. 46-85% of all people in Sweden are agnostics or atheists. This means they do not believe in a god. About 6.4 million people in Sweden, that is 67% of all, are members of the Church of Sweden, but only 2% of members go to church often.

In popular music, ABBA, Roxette, Entombed, At the gates, Dark Tranquillity, Hypocrisy, Grave, Dissection, Avicii, Tove Lo, Watain and Ace of Base have had several hits throughout the years.

Sweden is a country with many talents in sports, such as soccer player Zlatan Ibrahimović. Sweden has two bronze medals and one silver medal from the World Cup in football (soccer) - 1950, 1958 and 1994. The soccer league in Sweden is called Allsvenskan. Sweden has also performed well in ice hockey along with the USA, Canada, Finland, Russia, Slovakia and the Czech Republic. The men's ice hockey top division in Sweden is called SHL. Sweden has also had several successful table tennis players, including Stellan Bengtsson and Jan-Ove Waldner, as well as alpine skiers like Ingemar Stenmark, Pernilla Wiberg and Anja Pärson, as well as biathlete Magdalena Forsberg and tennis players Björn Borg, Mats Wilander and Stefan Edberg.

Sweden also has great success in cross country skiing, having won several medals in the Olympic games.


