Ivory (wrestler)

Lisa Moretti (born November 26, 1961 in Inglewood, California) is an American professional wrestler. Moretti is better known by her ring name, Ivory. She is currently wrestling on the independent circuit. Moretti is best known for wrestling for WWF/E. She was the WWF Women's champion three times.

Ivory first appeared in 1999 as a valet for Mark Henry and D'Lo Brown. Immediately she feuded with Debra. The two divas were often in catfights. At one point, Ivory stripped Debra at St Valentine's Day Massacre. On an edition of "RAW", Debra and Jarrett were in a tag team match with Ivory and Brown. It ended early when Debra hit Ivory with Jarrett's guitar. Ivory began getting momentum in matches. She soon started working to win the Women's Championship. Debra was the champion at that time. On the June 14 episode of "RAW", Ivory beat Debra and won her first championship .

Ivory was a hard champion to beat. This was seen when she defended the title in a hardcore match against Luna Vachon at Unforgiven 1999 . At No Mercy 1999, Ivory lost the title to The Fabulous Moolah. She won the title back a week later in a rematch and became a two time champion . At Survivor Series, she lost to Moolah again in a tag team match . She lost the Women's Championship at Armageddon to Kat. 

Ivory began wrestling occasionally on "Heat" . On "Heat", she tried to win the title many times by beating Jacqueline but did not win . For months she appeared occasionally on "RAW", "Smackdown" and "Heat" . Ivory returned to compete weekly after Lita became champion. After not winning the title from her twice, Ivory finally won it on "Smackdown" in a Four Corners match. This was her third championship .

By this time, Ivory was being more conservative. She was a member of the group Right to Censor. Ivory was accompanied to the ring by Steven Richards . She kept the title at Survivor Series against Lita. She also kept it Rebellion. In both matches, she won with help from Richards . At Armageddon, she kept the title by winning in a triple threat match with Molly Holly and Trish Stratus . In 2001, at Royal Rumble, Ivory defended the championship against Chyna. Chyna had just returned from an injury caused by Right to Censor. Ivory won the match when Chyna reinjured herself . Next, Ivory feuded with Kat over her faction, "Right to Nudity". She defended the championship against Kat on "Smackdown". At Wrestlemania X-Seven, she lost the title to Chyna and lost her rematch.

During the Invasion of WWF by the Alliance, Ivory caused Jacqueline lose a handicap match to Tori Wilson and Stacy Keibler. This led to Ivory joining the alliance . She became a regular on "Raw" and "Smackdown". She wrestled against Holly and Lita in many matches . She was partnered with Lance Storm. Ivory often accompanying him to the ring . At Survivor Series, she was in a match to pick a new champion but was pinned by Stratus . 

In 2002, Ivory competed rarely because she was working as a trainer on Tough Enough 2 . After Wrestlemania, on "Raw", she returned and attacked Stratus and Lita. This set up a tag team match for "Smackdown". The match was Jazz and Ivory vs Trish and Lita. She was drafted to "Smackdown" when the Brand Extension began but she rarely wrestled . In late 2002, just before Survivor Series, Ivory was traded to "Raw". She lost a match to Trish Stratus who was champion at the time.

She competed a few times in 2003 on "Heat". Most of her work at this time was a feud with Victoria. They fought in some singles matches but more often in tag team matches . She lost a number one contender's match to Victoria on "Heat" .

In 2004 Ivory retired from in-ring competition. She began co-hosting a new program called "WWE Experience" with Todd Grisham . In mid 2004, Ivory left WWE.

Lisa Moretti was born and raised in Los Angeles, California. She has two brothers and one sister. She studied public relations at the University of Southern California. Moretti was a cheerleader for the Los Angeles Express of the United States Football League in the mid-1980s. Before starting her career in wrestling, Moretti worked as a make-up artist for the cosmetics brand Revlon.

After leaving WWE, Moretti began working in the landscaping industry. Moretti also worked with her niece to help the pet population affected by Hurricane Katrina. She volunteered for an organization called Best Friends Animal Society. It is a no-kill animal shelter—a shelter that does not euthanize to control animal populations—in Utah. She also worked with her local animal shelter on San Juan Island in northwestern Washington. She has lived there since 2000. She opened Downtown Dog in 2007 with Jessica Ray. It is an animal daycare. It also deals with training, grooming, and cat boarding. The company is in Friday Harbor. In June 2007, they added veterinary care and later the Bow Wow Bus. The Bow Wow Bus takes the dogs on outings. Moretti has taken classes to learn how to groom animals. She now grooms them as part of the business.



