Tim Finn

Brian Timothy "Tim" Finn, OBE (born 25 June 1952) is a singer-songwriter born in New Zealand. Finn is most known for his music with his band Split Enz. He has released solo albums, and was member of his brother Neil's band Crowded House. He also released albums with Neil as the Finn Brothers.

Tim Finn was born in Te Awamutu, New Zealand. He went to Sacred Heart College, Auckland, a Catholic boarding school. In 1971 he completed a Bachelor of Arts degree at the University of Auckland. It is there that he met Mike Chunn, Robert Gillies, Philip Judd and Noel Crombie. Phil and Tim formed a band called Split Ends, which became Split Enz before they started to tour Australia. 

Finn recorded his first solo album, "Escapade", in 1983. This album was very successful in Australia and New Zealand. Because of this, he decided to leave Split Enz in 1984. The band broke up. In early 1985, Tim moved to London. His second album "Big Canoe" was not as successful as the first album. He also wrote some music for movies, and acted in a few movies. His role in "The Coca-Cola Kid" was about five minutes long. He had a bigger role in the movie "La Donna della Luna" (The Moon Woman). 

In late 1989, he went to live in Melbourne. He recorded his third album, "Tim Finn". In early 1990 he joined Crowded House, the group Neil had formed after Split Enz split up. The band recorded "Woodface" with him. He left Crowded House after the album. Because of their success, Tim Finn and Neil Finn were made OBE for services to New Zealand music in the 1993 Queen's Birthday Honours List.

The album "Finn" was released in 1995. This was an album made by Neil and Tim as the "Finn Brothers". Also in 1995, Finn worked with singers Andy White and Liam Ó Maonlaí. They formed the band ALT. They released the album "Altitude".

In 2000, the album "" was recorded featuring Finn, and New Zealand artists Bic Runga, and Dave Dobbyn. The concerts and album have all three musicians singing and playing on each other's songs.

In 2004, the Finn brothers released their second album together, titled, "Everyone Is Here". 

Tim has released Imaginary Kingdom in 2006, The Conversation in 2008. He has collaborated on the Seven Worlds Collide projects in 2004 and 2009 with his brother Neil, and artists like Eddie Vedder. In 2009 "North, South, East, West...", a "best of" was released. 

Finn is currently married to television presenter Marie Azcona, formerly of MTV and TVNZ One's Music Week. They have worked together on several songs, some of which are featured on "Steel City" soundtrack. Finn and Azcona have two children; a son, Harper, and a daughter, Elliott.

"This discography relates to releases by Tim Finn only. See Finn Brothers' discography, Crowded House discography and Split Enz discography for other related works."



