List of Futurama episodes

Futurama is a Fox animated television series, which originally aired on the network from March 28, 1999 to August 10, 2003. All four original production seasons are available on DVD. The DVD sets were entitled "Volume #" in Region 1 (USA), and "Season #" in the Regions 2 (Europe) and 4 (Australia). The Complete Collection DVD set was released on October 25, 2004 in Region 2, and on March 22, 2005 in Region 1. After cancellation on Fox four direct-to-DVD movies were released and later aired as 16 individual episodes on Comedy Central. 

"Futurama" was originally created as four seasons; Fox broadcast it out of the intended order as five seasons. This list is in production order for the first four seasons on Fox, primarily because this is the order used on the DVDs, as intended by the artists, and it helps avoid plot inconsistencies. A list of Futurama episodes by broadcast order is available in a separate article. The production code is the code used by Fox to indicate the production order of the episodes, and is in the format #ACV##. The first number represents the production season. ACV is Fox's series code for "Futurama". The second number is the episode's number. The TV broadcast code indicates the broadcast order. It is in the format S##E##, where S## indicates the broadcasting season of which there were 5, and E## indicates the episode's number. Seasons currently airing or in production are ordered by broadcast date as the DVD order is unknown, when the DVDs are released the order will be adjusted to represent the final order in case episodes have been aired out of the intended order as they did on Fox.

"Futurama" 's episode ratings in the United States are TV-PG for suggestive dialogue (D), offensive language (L), sexual content (S), and/or graphic violence (V) in its earlier episodes on Fox and on Cartoon Network's Adult Swim airings. The later episodes on Fox are rated TV-14 for suggestive dialogue (D), offensive language (L), sexual content (S), and/or graphic violence (V). The Comedy Central reruns are also rated TV-14, but do not include any of the sub-ratings. In the UK, "Futurama" episodes have been rated PG (parental guidance suggested when viewing) or 12 (not recommended viewing for anyone under 12 years of age), depending on the episode's content. The only episode not rated PG or 12 is "Leela's Homeworld," which is rated U (recommended for all ages).

Season five aired on Comedy Central from March 23, 2008 to August 30, 2009. It consisted of the four straight-to-DVD films divided into sixteen individual episodes. Each four-episode set aired after the release of the accompanying film. In addition to airing the new season, Comedy Central has taken over syndication of the previous episodes. A sixth season, consisting of 26 episodes, began airing on Comedy Central on June 24, 2010.


