Latino moderne

Latino Moderne (LM) is a language that was made by David Th. Stark in the 1980s and first published on the internet in 1996. It is a revision of the grammar of the IALA's language Interlingua, using the IALA's words with little change. Applying the same principles that were used in developing the international vocabulary for Interlingua to developing a grammar, L.M. restores personal endings on its verbs and has gender and number agreement between its nouns and their adjectives and articles. The language also has an more clearly developed system for showing case distinctions in its pronouns. This, in effect, frees L.M. from a dependence on word order as is found in Interlingua. The changes in L.M. actually are very simple and easy to learn, providing a much more poetic and free use of it for international communication. Most of the changes that L.M. makes to the IALA language are actually suggestions that were set forth by the original deverlopers of the IALA project. Properly speaking, L.M. should be viewed as a continuation to the IALA project, not as something in competition with it. 

It is hoped that the spread and use of Latino Moderne may assist in solving some of the communication problems that exist in the European Union and throughout the modern world. In this respect it shares the same goals as Interlingua, Esperanto, etc.. The developer of the language hopes that L.M. will be received and used as a suggested model language to help promote better international communication and friendship among nations.

NO community is presently established for the Latino Moderne (L.M.) project. Its developer, David Th. Stark, welcomes any activity in this area by other interested parties. "The language, Latino Moderne, belongs to all those who desire to use it." 

LM21

Patre nostre, 
Qui es in celo,
Sia Sanctificate tue nomine!
Que adveni tue regno!
Sia facite tue voluntate, como in celo, assi sur la terra!
Le pan nostre necesse da nobis hodie,
E pardona nobis las debitas nostras,
Como anque nos pardonamus les debitores nostres.
E ne induce nes in a le tentation,
Ma libera nes ab le mal,
Proque tues son le regno e la potentia e la gloria 
Por tute las epochas. Amen.

And Modern Latin is also a simplified Interlingua, which same text as above is :

Nostre Patre qui es in le cielos, Que tu nome sia sanctificate ! Que tu reino veni ! Que tu voluntat sia facte sure terra como in cielo ! Dona nois este jorno nostre pan quotidian, E perdona nois nostre ofensas como nos perdona a nostre ofensores. E non somete nois al tentation, ma libera nois del mal, Porque son de te le reino, le pocentia e le gloria pro le sieclos de sieclos. Amen.



