Carnarvon, Western Australia

Carnarvon is a coastal town about 900 kilometres north of Perth, Western Australia. It is at the mouth of the Gascoyne River on the Indian Ocean. The popular Shark Bay World Heritage Site lies to the south of the town. In 2006, there were 5,283 people living in Carnarvon.

The town began in 1883, as a port and supply centre for the surrounding region. It is the administrative centre for the Shire of Carnarvon, the town site was officially listed on 4 June 1891. It was named after Henry Herbert, 4th Earl of Carnarvon, Under-Secretary of State for the Colonies.

Carnarvon has had three tramways.

Carnarvon has a warm to hot dry climate. Average yearly rainfall is with the rainiest months being in May and June. Occasionally tropical cyclones will influence Carnarvon and bring very heavy rain, high temperatures and strong winds. Apart from possible cyclones, summers are usually dry. Temperatures range from an average maximum of in February to in July. Average minimums are and respectively.

Main industries of the area include:


During the 1960s, NASA set up the Carnarvon Tracking Station to support the Gemini and Apollo space program. The tracking station was closed in the mid 1970s. Only the foundations of this historical site remain.

Radio Australia had a shortwave relay station (built during the 1970s) that used to relay programming to Europe, South Asia and South East Asia.

There are five schools in the town, three government-run and two independent. These schools are: St Mary's Star of the Sea Catholic School which was built in 1906, Carnarvon Senior High School, East Carnarvon Primary School, Carnarvon Primary School, Carnarvon Christian School and Carnarvon School of the Air.

In 1964 and 1965, 12 rockets were launched from Carnarvon to a maximum altitude of .

On 20 May 1988, the bulk carrier "Korean Star" ran aground in bad weather near Cape Cuvier, within the port limits of Carnarvon. Around 600 tonnes of fuel oil were spilled into the ocean. Damage was limited to of remote beaches and coastline. The ship was left grounded, however very little of the wreck remains to be seen.



