Auch

Auch (Gascon: "Aush" or "Aux") is a commune in southwestern France, in the region of Occitanie. It is the "prefecture" (capital) of the Gers department. It is also the capital of 3 "cantons": Auch-1, Auch-2 and Auch-3.

Auch is the historical capital of Gascony and the people of this city are known, in French, as "auscitain" (women: "auscitaines").

Auch is an ancient town. The name of "Auch" comes from the people that inhabited the area at the time of the Roman conquest. The name of this tribe was "Ausci", singular "Auscus".

The Romans named the town where that tribe lived as "Augusta Auscorum" (or "Augusta Ausciorum"), which means "Augusta of the Ausci". Eventually, "Augusta" was dropped, and the name changed into modern Gascon "Aush", and modern French "Auch".

Auch is in the southwest of France, in Armagnac (Gascony), in the valley of the Gers river. It extends along the sides of the river that gives its name to the department.

The river splits the city in two parts:

The "commune" is, in straight line, at from the Pyrenees, from the Bay of Biscay, from Bordeaux, from Toulouse and from Pau.

It has an area of and its average altitude is .

Auch is surrounded by the following "communes", all of them part of the arrondissement of Auch: Roquelaure to the north, Preignan and Montaut-les-Créneaux to the northeast, Leboulin and Montégut to the east, Pessan to the southeast, Pavie to the south, Lasséran and Barran to the southwest, Ordan-Larroque and Duran to the west and Castin and Castillon-Massas to the northwest.

The climate of the department is an oceanic climate with template summers, Cfb (Marine West Coast Climate) in the Köppen climate classification.

The average temperature for the year in Auch is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The highest recorded temperature in Auch is , which was recorded in August. The lowest recorded temperature in Auch is , which was recorded in January.

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Auch is . The month with the most precipitation on average is May with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is February with an average of .

The city of Auch has a population, in 2014, of 21,807; its population density is of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Auch

Auch is the prefecture of the Cantal department, the capital of the "arrondissement" of Auch and the administrative centre () of three cantons: 

It is part of the intercommunality "Le Grand Auch" ().

Auch is twinned with:

A city founded by the Romans, Auch had its period of power during the Middle Ages, when it was the capital of the old province of Gascony. The high quality of the limestone is an important component of its monuments and buildings, such as its cathedral.

Some of these places of interest are:




