Oxygen

Oxygen (O) is a chemical element. In nature, oxygen is a gas with no color or smell. Oxygen is a very important element because we need it to live. It is a part of the air people breathe and the water people drink. Many living things (including humans) need oxygen to live and breathe, though it is poisonous to some forms of life. In liquid state of matter, oxygen is light blue.

Oxygen was initially discovered in 1772 by Carl Wilhelm Scheele. Then Joseph Priestley also discovered it two years later and spread the news before Scheele. This made many people think that Priestley discovered oxygen first. The word oxygen comes from Greek words: oxus (acid) and gennan (generate).
Oxygen comes to earth from all parts of the universe in meteorites. It is also found in minerals and plants that grow on the earth and other planets.

 Water contains oxygen. When one oxygen atom combines with two hydrogen atoms, they form a molecule of water (also written as HO). This water is required by all living things to live.

Air also contains oxygen. Air is made of many gases that are mixed together. Approximately 21% of the air is oxygen. Oxygen is especially important because all animals use oxygen to get energy from their food.

Oxygen is also what makes burning possible. This is called combustion. When an object or something burns or combusts, oxygen combines with another substance and releases heat and light. For instance, when you burn wood, the oxygen in air combines with the wood to create fire. This ability of oxygen has many uses. But it also makes pure oxygen very dangerous. If pure oxygen touches a flame or spark, it can combust and cause great damage. Combustion is used in many ways.

Pure oxygen can be produced in several ways. In nature, plants produce oxygen by using sunlight, carbon dioxide (another gas) and water. This process is called photosynthesis. Most of the oxygen in the air is produced by photosynthesis.

Oxygen can also be created by humans, using a process called electrolysis. In this process, electricity passes through water. As a result, the water molecules break and release oxygen and hydrogen gas.


