Macedonia (region)

Macedonia (from Greek: Μακεδονία "Makedonίa") is a region in the southeastern Europe, in Balkans. In ancient times it was a Greek kingdom and its greatest leader was Alexander The Great. Today, its borders have changed and it has been separated in three countries: Greece with the region of Macedonia or Greek Macedonia, the country Macedonia or Vardar Macedonia and Bulgaria with Macedonia of Pirin (Blagoevgrad province).

Greece and the Republic of Macedonia have been arguing over the name Macedonia ever since the independence of the Macedonia. The Republic of Macedonia had to choose a temporary name in order to be recognized by the United Nations. The two countries have been discussing a solution for a new name that both find acceptable. Bulgaria has not taken part in the dispute but has some disagreements with Macedonia. Even though Bulgaria was the first country to recognize Macedonia with its name, it doesn't support the Macedonian ethnicity and language, but claim it's all Bulgarian. 

Macedonia (Greek: Μακεδονία - Makedonia) is a historical and geographical region in northern Greece. It is the second most populous region of Greece and usually it is referred as Northern Greece with Thrace. It is situated between the Pindus Mountains and river Nestos and it borders west with Epirus and Thessaly, northwestern with Albania, north with the Republic of Macedonia, northeastern with Bulgaria and east with Thrace. Its south coasts are washed by the Aegean Sea.

Republic of Macedonia (Macedonian: Република Македонија - Republika Makedonija) is an independent state on the Balkan peninsula in southeastern Europe. The country borders Serbia to the north, Albania to the west, Greece to the south, and Bulgaria to the east. The country's currency is the Macedonian Denar (MKD).

Blagoevgrad Province (Bulgarian: област Благоевград, oblast Blagoevgrad or Благоевградска област, Blagoevgradska oblast), also known as Pirin Macedonia (Bulgarian: Пиринска Македония, Pirinska Makedoniya), is a province (oblast) of southwestern Bulgaria. To the north and east it borders with four other Bulgarian provinces, to the south with Greece and the west with the Republic of Macedonia.


