Chase &amp; Status

Chase & Status are an electronic production duo from London consisting of Saul "Chase" Milton and Will "Status" Kennard.

Chase & Status have had three number one tracks on the UK Dance Chart in 2007 with the double A-side "Hurt You"/"Sell Me Your Soul", and in 2008 with "Take Me Away"/"Judgement (Informer)". On 5 October 2008, they reached number 70 on the national singles chart and number one on the UK Dance Chart again with their single "Pieces" with vocals by Plan B. In 2009, they made number 45 with "Against All Odds" which had UK rapper Kano on vocals.

Chase & Status' first album, "More Than Alot", debuted in the UK album charts at number 49 on 19 October 2008 and entered the UK dance album chart at number 2.

Their album "More Than Alot" received the Best Album Award at the 2009 Drum and Bass awards, Birmingham, UK.

Following the success of their last album the band wanted to gain a more global success. After meeting with a long time favourite of theirs, Cloud9, they decided to move in a different direction. Together they agreed that the band should do more pop collaborations in order to achieve a more better fanbase. Soon afterwards they quickly began working on the album. On 8 November 2009, the duo entered the UK Top 40 for the first time with the track "End Credits". The track was released on 2 November 2009 and featuring British musician Plan B managed to reach a peak of number 9 on the UK Singles Chart. The single was written for the movie "Harry Brown", which also starred Ben Drew, aka. Plan B.

The duo then released "Let You Go" on 15 August 2010, revealing it to be the second official single to be released from their second studio album, named "No More Idols" according to posters outside their album launch show at the HMV Forum in Kentish Town on October 21. The single had vocals from Mali and debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 11; marking the duo's second Top 40 hit in a row. "Hypest Hype" featuring Tempa T was confirmed in October 2010 to be the third single from the album and was released as a free download from their website on 8 November 2010; meaning it did not qualify to chart. The fourth single from the album is the dubstep-flavoured "Blind Faith", which features Nottingham-born soul singer/songwriter Liam Bailey was released on January 24, 2011. The new album also contains a new single 'Heavy' with Dizzee Rascal.


