Bruno Mars

Peter Gene Hernandez (born October 8, 1985), known by his stage name Bruno Mars, is an American singer-songwriter and record producer.

After an unsuccessful stint with Motown Records, Mars signed with Atlantic Records in 2009. He became recognized as a solo artist after lending his vocals and co-writing the hooks for the songs "Nothin' on You" by B.o.B, and "Billionaire" by Travie McCoy. He also helped write the hits "Right Round" by Flo Rida featuring Kesha, "Wavin' Flag" by K'naan, and "Fuck You!" by Cee Lo Green, also known as "Forget You". In October 2010, he released his album, "Doo-Wops & Hooligans". The album reached number three on the "Billboard" 200. He was nominated for seven Grammys at the 53rd Grammy Awards, winning Best Male Pop Vocal Performance for "Just the Way You Are". His singles "Just the Way You Are", "Nothin' on You", "Grenade", "Locked Out of Heaven", "When I Was Your Man", "Uptown Funk", "That's What I Like", "Billionaire", "The Lazy Song", "It Will Rain", and "24K Magic" have all reached the top five of the US "Billboard" Hot 100, with the first seven reaching number one.

Mars has sold 10 million albums around the world.

In 2013, his song "Locked Out of Heaven" was nominated for a Grammy Award. He was featured on British producer Mark Ronson's song "Uptown Funk", which became the number-one song of 2015 in the United States. It spent 14 weeks at number one on the "Billboard" Hot 100. "Uptown Funk" won a Grammy Award for Record of the Year.

Mars co-wrote the song "All I Ask" from English singer-songwriter Adele's 2015 album "25". In 2016, Mars released the single "24K Magic" (pronounced "twenty-four-karat magic") from his album, also called "24K Magic". It has reached the top five of the "Billboard" Hot 100. The second single from "24K Magic", "That's What I Like", became Mars' seventh number-one song on the Hot 100.

Peter Gene Hernandez was born on October 8, 1985, in Honolulu, Hawaii. He was raised in the Waikiki neighborhood of Honolulu. He is the son of Peter Hernandez and Bernadette "Bernie" San Pedro Bayot (died June 1, 2013). His father is of half Puerto Rican and half Jewish (from Hungary and Ukraine) ancestry and is originally from Brooklyn, New York. Mars' mother immigrated to Hawaii from the Philippines as a child and was a Filipino. After performing many times in his hometown throughout his childhood, he decided to pursue a musical career and moved to Los Angeles after graduating from high school.

As a child, he was influenced by artists such as Elvis Presley and Michael Jackson and would often try to sing like these artists. Mars also incorporates reggae and Motown inspired sounds into his work. Jon Caramanica of "The New York Times" referred to Mars as "one of the most versatile and accessible singers in pop."




