Glee

Glee is an American musical comedy-drama television show. It started on May 19, 2009. It ended on March 20, 2015. Its sixth and last season started on January 9, 2015. The show is about a group of high school students and their teachers at the fictional William McKinley High School. The show is set in Lima, Ohio. Most of the students are in the school's glee club, called New Directions. The students and adults deal with relationships, sexuality and social issues. They often sing to help them understand these topics.

The show gives most of the characters equal time on screen. In the first season, the captains of the glee club were Rachel Berry (played by Lea Michele) and Finn Hudson (played by Cory Monteith). The leader of the club is Spanish teacher Will Schuester (played by Matthew Morrison). The other glee club members were Artie Abrams (played by Kevin McHale), Mike Chang (played by Harry Shum Jr.), Tina Cohen-Chang (played by Jenna Ushkowitz), Quinn Fabray (played by Dianna Agron), Kurt Hummel (played by Chris Colfer), Mercedes Jones (played by Amber Riley), Matt Rutherford (played by Dijon Talton), Santana Lopez (played by Naya Rivera), Brittany Pierce (played by Heather Morris), and Noah "Puck" Puckerman (played by Mark Salling). Dijon Talton left the show after its first season. His character was said to have transferred to another school.

The show's main villain is cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester (played by Jane Lynch). The cheerleaders are called the Cheerios. The Cheerios win a lot of cheerleading contests, so they get a lot of money from the school. When Will forms the glee club, some of the money for the Cheerios goes to the glee club. This makes Sue angry, and she decides to try to stop the glee club. She makes Quinn, Santana and Brittany, who are Cheerios, join the club as spies. Sue also tries to get Principal Figgins (played by Iqbal Theba) to break up the club, but he resists.

Other characters are Will's wife, Terri (played by Jessalyn Gilsig), football coach Ken Tanaka (played by Patrick Gallagher), football coach Shannon Beiste (played by Dot Jones), Kurt's father Burt Hummel (played by Mike O'Malley), Jesse St. James (played by Jonathan Groff), and guidance counsler Emma Pillsbury (played by Jayma Mays).

Ashley Fink was a guest star on the first season as Lauren zizes, one of the school's wrestling and book club members, before joining the glee club as a recurring character in season two.

In the second season, there were two new recurring characters. They were Sam Evans (played by Chord Overstreet), and Blaine Anderson (played by Darren Criss)

In the third season, there were three new recurring characters. They were Sugar Motta (played by Vanessa Lengies), Rory Flanagan (played by Damian McGinty), and Joe Hart (played by Samuel Larsen).

In the fourth season, there were more new recurring characters. They were Marley Rose (played by Melissa Benoist), Kitty Wilde (played by Becca Tobin), Ryder Lynn (played by Blake Jenner), Unique (played by Alex Newell), and Jake Puckerman (played by Jacob artist), who is the half-brother of Puck. They became main characters in the shows fifth season. However, Marley doesn't appear anymore after season five and Marley and Rory are the only two living cast members who don't appear in the sixth and final season

Cory Montieth was not in the show after its fourth season, because he died in 2013. In the show, his character died. The show never said why the character died.

In the sixth season, there were seven new recurring characters. They were Jane Hayward (played by Samantha Ware), Madison McCarthy (played by Laura Dreyfuss), Roderick (played by Noah Guthrie), Spencer Porter (played by Marshall Williams), Mason McCarthy (played by Billy Lewis Jr.), the twin brother of Madison, Myron Muskovitz (played by J.J. Torah), and Alistair (played by Finneas O'Connell).

"Glee" has won and been nominated for many awards. In 2009, the series won five Satellite Awards: "Best Musical or Comedy TV Series", "Best Actor" and "Actress in a Musical or Comedy TV Series" for Morrison and Michele, "Best Supporting Actress" for Lynch and "Special Achievement for Outstanding Guest Star" for Kristin Chenoweth. In 2010, the show won a Golden Globe Award for "Best Television Series — Musical or Comedy". Morrison, Michele and Lynch also got acting nominations. The series was nominated for two Writers Guild of America Awards, with screenplays nominated in the "Comedy Series" and "New Series" categories. The "Glee" cast won the "Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series" award at the 16th Screen Actors Guild Awards. Paris Barclay and Ryan Murphy both got nominations for "Outstanding Directing – Comedy Series" at the Directors Guild of America Awards for their work on "Glee". In July 2010, "Glee" got 19 Emmy Award nominations, including "Outstanding Comedy Series", "Outstanding Lead Actor – Comedy Series" for Morrison and "Outstanding Lead Actress – Comedy Series" for Michele. It won 4, including "Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series" for Lynch and "Outstanding Guest Performance by a Male Actor in a Comedy Series" for Neil Patrick Harris.

On January 16, 2011, the show won a Golden Globe for "Best Television Series - Musical or Comedy" and both Lynch and Colfer won Golden Globes for Best Supporting Actress and Best Supporting Actor in a Television Series, Miniseries, or TV Film.

Some songs are old, by singers like Madonna and Journey, and some are still on the radio by singers like Lady Gaga and Britney Spears. The show has won many awards and is shown in several countries because of its popularity.

Mash-ups are a very common thing in the show. The first mash-ups were Bon Jovi's "It's My Life" with Usher's "Confessions Part II" by the boys, and Beyonce's "Halo" with Katrina and the Waves' "Walking on Sunshine" by the girls. Those were both in the episode "Vitamin D".



