Charles Blanvillain

Charly B (born Charles Blanvillain, 28 September 1981) is a French reggae artist, author, composer, interpreter, performing internationally.

Born in Rome, Italy from a family of musicians, he is from French, German and Armenian origins. At the age of 4 he moves to Geneva (Switzerland) where he spends most of his childhood. Music is then everything to him, and he discovers reggae at the age of 15, when he spends one year in Jamaica at IONA High School, hosted in a Jamaican family, having obtained a scholarship from the American Field Service. Later on, after passing his international baccalaureate, he studies sound techniques at the School of Recording Arts, Canada and at the Sound and Audio Engineering School in Geneva, Switzerland.

He starts to be interested in Reggae music very early, and at the age of 15, he composes his first song. His musical studies in Canada, long stays in Jamaica, and time spent living in France near the Swiss border form the cultural triumvirate from which Charly B draws his artistic vision. He has been singing with legends of dancehall like Capleton, Kiprich, De Marco and Anthony B.

In 2002, at the age of 21, he wins the first prize for the best Geneva (Switzerland) Singjay In 2003, he writes a song for the movie Destination Jamaica by George Tait (Jungle George) In 2004, his song "My Queen" appears in the DVD sold with the Austrian surfers' magazine Methodmag, published in 60,000 copies. In 2005 he wins the 1st prize for best Singjay in Switzerland organized by Giddeon Productions Unfortunately, he cannot take advantage of the prize (concert on the main stage of Rototom Sunsplash Festival 2005) in Italy, as he is expected in Jamaica that summer, and therefore gives his prize to the number 2 in the competition, Elijah. In 2007, Eliane Dambre from the Ateliers du Funambule sponsored by Michel Fugain, which studios are based in Nyon, decides to present his candidacy to the Eurovision for Switzerland, against DJ Bobo to represent Switzerland, but his candidacy is too late to be retained. More recently, in 2009, he has won the price for the best reggae song at the competition organized by Reggae Europe. He has deposited to SACEM over 100 titles entirely composed by him (music and lyrics), in French, English and Jamaican patois.
In summer 2009, he makes what he calls "a crucial encounter" with the producer Jon Baker, and records at Geejam Studios his album Forever, which will be released in 2011 under the label Geejam Recordings/ Forward Recordings. This encounter with Jon Baker is very important for the artist; the British producer (a friend of Chris Blackwell, founder of Island Records), has discovered many talents, among which recently the reggae singer Alborosie and The Jolly Boys. Moreover, he gains the confidence of Reggae Europe who partners with Geejam Recordings for the album Forever.

At the end of 2009, he is invited in Germany (Leipzig) to meet with Pionear from Germaican records then invited by Stylordz in Toronto and New York for the anniversary of Zulu Nation. In Toronto he shoots the clip of the song "Ooh No". In 2010, invited by the CAMA Festival in Hanoï, Vietnam, he makes a Vietnam tour (Hanoï and Ho Chi Minh City) and upon his return, attends the ROTOTOM Sunsplash Festival in August 2010. He is travelling between Jamaica and France, working on his last album Forever, which will be released in 2011.

Vietnam Tour Vietnam in May 2010, Hanoï and Ho Chi Minh City interview Cama Festival télé Hanoï








