Dorothy Hodgkin

Dorothy Mary Hodgkin OM FRS (12 May 1910 – 29 July 1994), "née" Crowfoot, was a British chemist, credited with the development of protein crystallography. Hodgkin received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1964.

Hodgkin was born in Cairo Egypt. She and her sisters were sent to live in England when World War l started. She spent the rest of her life there. Her mother was an expert on nature and Ancient Egyptian Textiles. Hodgkin’s father was a British archeologist and scholar. 

She studied crystals and became a teacher Somerville College at University of Oxford. In 1969, Hodgkin was able to use computer technology discover the structure of Insulin. Insulin is a protein in the body that is used to treat diabetes. 

She advanced the technique of X-ray crystallography, a method used to determine the three dimensional structures of biomolecules. 

Ernst Chain thought he found the structure of penicillin. Hodgkin proved he was right. She also found the structure of vitamin B. For her work she was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry. 

In 1969, after 35 years of work and five years after winning the Nobel Prize, Hodgkin was able to find the structure of insulin. 

X-ray crystallography became a widely used tool and helped to find structures of many biological molecules such as DNA. The structure of molecules helps us understand how they work.

Apart from the Nobel Prize, she was appointed to the Order of Merit, and given the Copley Medal, the top award of the Royal Society.

She was Chancellor of Bristol University from 1970 to 1988, and President of Pugwash from 1976 to 1988. Pugwash is an organization which holds conferences on Science and World Affairs. 

Her best-known student was Margaret Thatcher, who consulted her when she (Thatcher) was in office. 

The Order of Merit display at the Royal Society (see infobox) mentions two interesting facts:

Hodgkin was not allowed to enter the the United States without special permission from the CIA. She protested and wanted world peace. She also had a good relationship with J.D. Bernal, who was considered too liberal. She received the Lenin Peace Prize in 1987.

Hodgkin died of a stroke in 1994.


