Sheldon Kennedy

Sheldon Kennedy (born June 15, 1969) is a Canadian retired professional ice hockey player. He played for the Detroit Red Wings, Boston Bruins and Calgary Flames in the National Hockey League (NHL). Kennedy was drafted by the Red Wings in the fourth round of the 1988 NHL Entry Draft while playing with the Swift Current Broncos of the Western Hockey League (WHL). In the WHL, Kennedy helped the Broncos capture the 1989 Memorial Cup, and was named to the tournament all-star team. Kennedy represented Canada internationally at the World Junior Championships in 1988 and 1989. He helped Canada win a gold medal at the 1988 tournament.

Kennedy is best known for coming forward as a victim of sexual abuse at the hands of his coach, Graham James. In 1998, Kennedy roller bladed across Canada to raise awareness and funds for sexual abuse victims. Currently, Kennedy serves as a spokesperson for violence and abuse prevention programs with the Canadian Red Cross.

Kennedy started playing junior hockey with the Winnipeg South Blues of the Manitoba Junior Hockey League (MJHL) in 1985. After being noticed by Graham James at a hockey camp, Kennedy joined the Swift Current Broncos of the Western Hockey League (WHL) for the 1986–87 season. Kennedy spent his entire WHL career with the Broncos, helping the team capture the 1989 Memorial Cup. For his play during the tournament, Kennedy was named to the Memorial Cup All-Star Team. He was also named to the WHL's Eastern Conference Second All-Star Team.
Kennedy was selected by the Detroit Red Wings in the fourth round (80th overall) of the 1988 National Hockey League (NHL) Entry Draft. His first professional season was split between the Red Wings in the NHL and their minor league affiliate Adirondack Red Wings of the American Hockey League (AHL). At the NHL level, Kennedy scored two goals and added seven assists in 20 games. Kennedy spent the next four seasons bouncing between the AHL and NHL within the Red Wings organization. The Winnipeg Jets acquired Kennedy from the Red Wings after the 1993–94 season. The NHL lockout meant that Kennedy did not actually play for the Jets before being picked up on waivers by the Calgary Flames. Kennedy spent two seasons in Calgary, then the Flames decided not to renew his contract in 1996, shortly after his sexual abuse revelation. He signed as a free agent with the Boston Bruins for the 1996–97 season but also spent time with the Providence Bruins, Boston's AHL affiliate. The 1996–97 season was Kennedy's last campaign in the NHL but he later resurfaced in the 1998–99 season with the Manitoba Moose of the now-defunct International Hockey League. Kennedy also played for EV Landshut of the Deutsche Eishockey Liga in Germany during the 1998–99 season.

A television movie about his life and campaign, "The Sheldon Kennedy Story", aired on CTV in 1999. Jonathan Scarfe starred as Kennedy. In 2006 he released his autobiography, "Why I Didn't Say Anything - The Sheldon Kennedy Story". In the book he revealed that nightmares of James still continue to plague him. He also wrote frankly about his battles with cocaine addiction.



