List of political parties in France

France has a multi-party system, which means that several political parties must form coalitions in order to form a government. This is because it would be very difficult for any one party to win a majority of seats in the French National Assembly. Since the 1980s, there have been two major coalitions; one is a collection of right-wing parties and the other is a collection of left-wing parties.

National Front ("Front National") - Promotes strong law enforcement, anti-immigration, Euroscepticism and a return to traditional French values.

Union for a Popular Movement ("Union pour un Mouvement Populaire") - Promotes conservatism, liberal-conservatism, libertarianism and nationalism.

National Centre of Independents and Peasants ("Centre National des Indépendants et Paysans") - Promotes Social conservatism, Liberal conservatism and National conservatism.

Hunting, Fishing, Nature, Tradition ("Chasse, Pêche, Nature, Traditions") - Promotes traditional rural values which include giving people the right to hunt and fish freely and the refusal of environmental legislation. Is also conservative and Eurosceptic.

Movement for France ("Mouvement pour la France") - Promotes strong law enforcement, conservatism, anti-immigration and Euroscepticism.

Democratic Movement ("Mouvement démocrate") - Promotes centrism, social liberalism and is Pro-European.

New Centre ("Nouveau Centre") - Promotes Christian democracy and liberalism.

Radical Party ("Party Radical") - Promotes liberalism. 

The Greens ("Les Verts") - Promotes Environmentalism, Social progressivism and social democracy.

Socialist Party ("Parti Socialiste") - Promotes Social democracy, Democratic socialism and socialism.

Unitarian Left ("Gauche Unitaire") - Promotes anti-capitalism and democratic socialism.

Citizen and Republican Movement ("Mouvement républicain et citoyen") - Promotes left-wing nationalism, social democracy, Euroscepticism and socialism.

New Anticapitalist Party ("Nouveau parti anticapitaliste") - Promotes Anti-capitalism, Democratic socialism and Eco-socialism.

Workers' Struggle ("Lutte Ouvrière") - Promotes Trotskyism and communism.

Left Party ("Parti de gauche") - Promotes democratic socialism, republicanism, anti-capitalism and environmentalism.

Radical Party of the Left ("Parti Radical de Gauche") - Promotes left-wing radicalism and social liberalism.

French Communist Party ("Parti communiste français") - Promotes eurocommunism, communism and democratic socialism.




















