Goo Ha-ra

Goo Ha-ra (Hangul: 구하라) was born on January 18, 1991. She is a South Korean singer, known for being a member of girl group Kara formed by DSP Entertainment in 2007. 

Goo Ha-ra was born on January 18, 1991, in Gwangju, South Korea. Before debuting, she participated in the SM's youth appearance tournament in 2005. In 2007, she auditioned for JYP, however, she lost the runoff.

She was also an online shopping mall model, having been scouted after her photos were uploaded onto DSP's homepage. Thus, Goo Hara became a member of Kara. Currently, she postponed going to university in order to concentrate on her career.

Kara debuted on March 29, 2007. In 2008, however, a member, Kim Sunghee, left the group. DSP Entertainment replaced her with two new members, Goo Hara and Kang Jiyoung, and Kara made a comeback with Rock U, which changed their image from "Hip-hop" to "cute and playful". 

In December 4, 2008, Kara started their comeback on M! Countdown with "Pretty Girl". In February 2009, Kara released their second mini-album "Honey". "Honey" became the group's first #1 single when it topped the "M! Countdown" and The Music Trend. 

In late July 2009, Kara revealed their second album named "Revolution". Due to the popularity of their songs Wanna and Mister, Kara's overall popularity increased. Kara recently started promotions with their third mini-album "Lupin".

In late 2008, she appeared along with the other Kara members in an episode of MBC sitcom "That Person is Coming", having the most prominent role as a female gang leader.

She joined MBC's "Hunters", along with SS501's Kim Hyun Joong, Jung Yong Hwa, Lee Hwi Jae, Shin Jung Hwan and two professional hunters to catch overpopulated wild boars that have become a dangerous threat to people and crops. The first episode aired on December 6, 2009. However, due to complaints about animal rights after the first episode, the show's format was quickly changed to "Eco House"; Goo Hara does not appear in the new show. 

In October 2009, she became a cast member in KBS reality show "Invincible Youth" ("청춘불패"). In January 2015, she became a co-host in KBS "A Style For You" along with Hani.



