Jimaní

The Dominican city of Jimaní is the head municipality of the Independencia province, on the southwestern part of the country. The city is near the border with Haiti, on the main road that goes from the Dominican Republic to Port-au-Prince, capital city of Haiti.

For most of its history, Jimaní was part of Neiba but in 1938 it was made part of La Descubierta and in 1943 was elevated to the category of municipal districts (a municipal district is an administrative part of a municipality) of La Descubierta, in the Baoruco province.

With the creation of the Independencia province in 1948, Jimaní was made the head municipality of that new province.

The municipality had, in , a total population of 10,034: 4,967 men and 5,067 women. The urban population was of the total population.

Jimaní is located in the "Hoya de Enriquillo" valley, in the southwest of the country, close to Haiti. The municipality has a total area of . It has two municipal districts (subdivisions of a municipality): Boca de Cachón and El Limón.

The city of Jimaní is at to the west of Azua and at to Santo Domingo. It is at an elevation of above sea level.

It is between the two main lakes of the Hispaniola: Lake Enriquillo (Dominican Republic) and Étang Saumâtre (Haiti).

Jimaní has the municipality of La Descubierta, the Lake Enriquillo and the Baoruco province to the north, the Barahona province to the east, the Pedernales to the south and Haiti to the west.

Jimaní has a tropical wet and dry/ savanna climate (Köppen climate classification : Aw).

The average amount of rainfall for the year in the city is . Most rains fall during the end of summer and in fall. The month with the most precipitation on average is May with of rainfall, followed by October with .

The driest season is winter. The month with the least rainfall on average is January with an average of and the second is December with .

Jimaní is in a very hot region; the average temperature for the year is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The municipality of Jimaní has two municipal districts:

The main economic activity is commerce with Haiti. Farming is not well developed because the region is very dry and hot. Most people that lives here work for the government or in the commerce between the two countries.


