Salcedo, Hermanas Mirabal

The Dominican city of Salcedo is the head municipality of the Hermanas Mirabal province, on the central part of the country.

The city is named after "Francisco Antonio Salcedo" who fought in the northwestern part of the country against the Haitian army during the Dominican-Haitian War after the Dominican independence from Haiti in 1844.

The municipality had, in , a total population of 35,306: 17,683 men and 17,623 women. The urban population was of the total population.

In the place where is now the city of Salcedo there was a very small town with the name of "Juana Núñez". It was made a "Puesto cantonal" (an old category that now is called Municipal District) in 1880 as part of the old La Vega province.

With the creation of the Espaillat province in 1885, Juana Núñez was made part of this new province. In 1891, its name was changed from Juana Núñez to the present one, Salcedo.

Salcedo was made a municipality in 1905 and, when the Salcedo Province (now Hermanas Mirabal Province) was created in 1952, the city became the head municipality of the new province.

Salcedo in the Cibao valley, south of the Cordillera Septentrional ("Northern mountain range") and has a total area of . It has only one municipal district (a subdivision of a municipality): Jamao Afuera.

The city of Salcedo is at to the north of Santo Domingo and at to the east of Moca. It is at an elevation of above sea level.

The municipality is in the eastern part of the country, just to the south of the "Cordillera Oriental" (in English, "Eastern mountain range") in the region known as "Llano Costero del Caribe" (in English, "Caribbean Coastal Plain").

Salcedo has the municipality of Villa Tapia to the south, the Espaillat province to the west and north and the municipality of Tenares to the east.

Salcedo has a tropical wet climate (Köppen climate classification : Af), with no dry or cold season as it is constantly moist.

The average amount of rainfall for the year in the city is . Most rains fall during the end of summer and in fall. The month with the most precipitation on average is November with of rainfall, followed by May with .

The driest season is winter. The month with the least rainfall on average is February with an average of and the second is March with .

Salcedo is in a warm region; the average temperature for the year is . The warmest month, on average, is June with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The municipality of Salcedo has only one municipal districts:

Farming is the only economic activity in the municipality, except for some very small industries; the main products are plantain, cassava and cacao.


