The Four Stages of Cruelty

The Four Stages of Cruelty is a series of four printed engravings. They were published by the English artist William Hogarth in 1751. Every print is about a different part of life of Tom Nero, a fictional (not real) character.

The "First stage of Cruelty" shows Nero, when he is a child, hurting a dog. In the "Second stage of cruelty", Nero, who is an adult, beats his horse. Then in "Cruelty in perfection", he becomes a robber and murders his pregnant lover. At last, in "The reward of cruelty", his body is taken from the gallows after he is execution and is cut up into pieces by surgeons.

William Hogarth, who had been very unhappy at the acts of cruelty that he saw on the streets of London, printed the pictures for moral learning. They were printed on cheap paper for poor people. The pictures are rougher and more violent than Hogarth's other works, which usually have touches of humor. He had felt he needed to do this to make people understand his message. However, the pictures still have the small, careful details that Hogarth is famous for.

Like most of his other prints, such as "Beer Street" and "Gin Lane", Hogarth wanted "The Four Stages of Cruelty" to be a warning against cruel and evil acts, and that it was easy for a small bully to become a criminal. He wished to stop "that barbarous (mean) treatment of animals, the very sight of which renders (makes) the streets of our metropolis so distressing (terrible) to every feeling mind". Hogarth loved animals. When he painted a portrait of himself, he included his pug in the picture. He also marked the graves of his dogs and birds at his home in Chiswick.

Hogarth was pleased with his pictures. "European Magazine" reported that he said to a person who sold books named Mr. Sewell:

In his unfinished "Apology for Painters" he added:
In his 1817 book "Shakespeare and His Times", Nathan Drake said that picture in the first plate changed the opinion of people about "throwing at cocks", and encouraged them to be firmer about stopping the people who did these things.

Some people, however, did not like the series very much. Charles Lamb said that the series were not as good as Hogarth's other works. Art historian Allan Cunningham also disliked the series:


