Vedas

The Vedas are the four holiest books of the Hindu religion (but the word "Hindu religion" is very recent, Hindu is a word given by western world. There is no mention of Hindu in any Vedas. Vedas are not confined to religion, they are not religious book. Literal meaning of the word Veda is "Knowledge" or Gyan). They are believed to be one of the oldest books ever made by mankind. They are written in an earlier Indian language called Sanskrit. They have phrases (called "mantras") which are chanted at the religious ceremonies.

Although they were finally written down around 1,500 BC, they are actually much much older. They were passed down orally from one generation to the next, perhaps over thousands of years. The Vedas have stories about the Hindu gods, instructions for rituals, hymns, poetry, and prayers. The word "Vedic" means something about the Vedas. The language of the Vedas is called "Vedic Sanskrit".

Later types of Hinduism that are very different from the types of Hinduism that follow the Vedas respect them.

The four Vedas are:


Rigveda is the first of the four Vedas. Rigveda means a "Veda of praise". This Veda has several verses (hymns). These hymns praise a number of gods. This Veda is also the oldest Hindu holy book.

Samaveda is the second Veda of the four Vedas. Samaveda means the Veda of sacred songs. This Veda also has many hymns. They were sung by the Hindu priests and other Hindus during religious activities.

Yajurveda is the third of the four Vedas. Yajurveda means the Veda of the Yajus. Yajus were mantras sung during religious activities. Yajurveda is divided into two parts. The name of the first part is Black Yajurveda, called Taittiriya. The name of the second part is White Yajurveda, called Vajasaneyi.

Atharvaveda is the fourth of the four Vedas. Atharvaveda means the "Veda of knowledge".
The Atharvaveda holds key for the massive vedic knowledge on the sciences like medicine, sorcery and has many facts that the present generation is still trying to crack.



