Morning Musume

In late 1997, in Japan,a male singer-songwriter called Tsunku, held a contest to find a girl to be the lead singer of the band Sharam Q, which he was the frontman of. A lot of young girls came to the contest, and some of them became finalists. There is where Tsunku came up with the idea of making a girl group. This new group was called Morning Musume (Morning Daughters). The group was formed by Kaori Iida, Yuko Nakazawa, Asuka Fukuda, Aya Ishiguro and Natsumi Abe. They became known as the "First Generation" of the group. There have now been twelve of these "Generations". Most of these "Generations" have a few members. But the Third, Seventh and Twelfth Generations only had one member each.

From the start, the songs performed by these girls sold well. They became very famous in Japan (their fame later reached other countries too, thanks to their fans on the World Wide Web), and Tsunku formed other small groups inspired by Morning Musume. He created Hello!Project to hold them all.

Over time, when the girls become older and mature, they usually graduate from the group (but they can be kicked out for not behaving in the way that idols are supposed to behave). After that, they usually become soloists or models. New girls apply for a spot in the group whenever auditions are held. Thousands of girls apply, but very few make it in.

Morning Musume is still a top selling female group. In fact, its sales make it one of the best-selling girl groups in the World today, ranking around 9th - 11th place among girl groups worldwide in recent years, although much of this is probably due to the sheer amount of material released. At present it is known as "Morning Musume '14", which is pronounced as "Morning Musume One Four". It has new girls and makes singles every few months, plus studio albums about once a year. These singles and studio albums often come in "limited" versions with different cover photos and photo cards or posters included. In addition, there are also many live DVD and Blu-Ray releases, as well as photobooks and DVDs featuring certain members wearing clothes that show off how attractive they are. All the girls from the group appear frequently on TV and Radio. Their TV appearances are in the morning, especially for young people. They also make music videos and perform a lot of concerts in Japan, as well as sometimes performing concerts in other countries. Their music videos also come in different versions most of the time.



