Rodez

Rodez () is a commune in southwestern France in the department of Aveyron, , in the region of Occitanie, of which it is its prefecture.

It was the capital of Rouergue, a former French province. Rodez is also the capital of 3 "cantons": Rodez-1, Rodez-2 and Rodez-Onet.

Existing from at least the 5th century BC, Rodez was founded by Celtic people, the Ruteni. Here they built an "oppidum" (fortified place) which, after the Roman occupation, was named "Segodunum" ("Fortified place", "high hill"). The town later was given the name of "Civitas Rutenorum" ("City of the Ruteni") and then only "Ruteni" and, finally, Rodez.

After the fall of the Western Roman Empire, the city was taken by the Visigoths and then by the Franks; in 725, the Moors took the city and destroyed the old church. Later it was occupied by the armies of the Dukes of Aquitaine and of the Counts of Toulouse. English troops occupied Rodez during the Hundred Years War.

With the creation of the Aveyron department in 1790, Rodez became préfecture of the department.

The "commune" of Rodez is on the western part of the central plateau ("Massif Central") of France. The Aveyron river and the "Auterne" stream flow through the city.

Rodez has an area of , and its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is ..

Rodez is surrounded by the "communes" Onet-le-Château, Sainte-Radegonde, Le Monastère and Olemps.

The climate of Rodez, in the Köppen climate classification, is Cfb - Oceanic climate with template summers.

The inhabitants of Rodez are known, in French, as "Ruthénois" (women: "Ruthénoises").

With a population of 24,088, Rodez has a population density of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Rodez

Rodez forms, together with 5 other "communes", the urban area of Rodez with a population of 49,716 inhabitants (2013) and an area of . This urban area is the centre of the metropolitan area of Rodez, formed by 39 "communes" with a population of 85,181 inhabitants and an area of .

Rodez is the prefecture of the Aveyron department, the capital of the "arrondissement" of Rodez and the administrative centre () of three cantons:

It is part of the intercommunality "Rodez Agglomération" ().

Rodez is twinned with:

Some interesting places in Rodez are:




