Baitul Futuh

The Baitul Futuh Mosque (English: "House of Victories") is claimed to be the largest mosque in Europe. According to some estimates it is the second largest after the Mosque of Rome. It has an area of , the mosque complex can hold up to 10,000 worshippers. It was built in 2003 at a cost of about £5.5 million with money given by the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community. It is located in the London area of Morden, next to Morden South railway station and 150 yards from the Morden Underground.

The foundation stone was placed by Hazrat Mirza Tahir Ahmad on the 19 October 1999, in a ceremony attended by 2000 guests, and opened by the current head of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, Hazrat Mirza Masroor Ahmad, on the 3 October 2003. Mirza Masroor Ahmad is based at Fazl Mosque but delivers his weekly Khutbah (Friday sermon) from Baitul Futuh. The opening ceremony was attended by over 600 guests such as High Commissioners, Deputy High Commissioners, Members of European Parliament, Members of Parliament, Mayors of London boroughs, councilors, university lecturers, and representatives of 17 countries.

Several events are held at the Baitul Futuh Mosque to serve both the Muslim and greater community. In addition to regular prayers, its services include an annual Peace Symposiums, school tours, other local community events, as well as the 'Merton Youth Partnership Annual Conference', hosting the BBC Radio 4 Programme "Any Questions?", and is included in Open House London.

The Baitul Futuh Mosque has acted as the centre for the 'Loyalty, Freedom and Peace Campaign', which seeks to promote Islam as a peaceful religion, and to improve the integration of Muslims and non-Muslims.

The Peace Symposium 2010 chose the location to award the first Ahmadiyya Muslim Peace Prize to Lord Eric Avebury. The award is for lifetime contribution to the cause of Human Rights.

The Mosque receives over 10,000 visitors a year from schools, faith groups, public service organizations, charities, local and central government, and other groups.

The plan to burn the Qur'an by the Dove World Outreach Center on the 9th anniversary of 9/11 attacks was highly condemned at the Baitul Futuh mosque by several politicians and religious leaders, such as Fleur Sandringham (Judaism) and Rev. Andrew Wakefield.




