Gustave Doré

Paul Gustave Doré (; January 6, 1832 – January 23, 1883) was a French artist, engraver, illustrator and sculptor. Most of Doré's work was wood engraving and steel engraving.

Doré was born in Strasbourg. His first illustrated story was published at the age of fifteen. As a young man, he began work as a literary illustrator in Paris. He was hired to illustrate scenes from books by Rabelais, Balzac, Milton and Dante. 

In 1853, Doré was asked to illustrate the works of Lord Byron. British publishers asked him to do more work, including a new illustrated English Bible. Ten years later, he illustrated a French edition of Cervantes's "Don Quixote". His images of the knight and Sancho Panza have influenced later readers, artists, and stage and film directors' ideas of how the two characters looked. Doré also illustrated an edition of Edgar Allan Poe's "The Raven" with larger than usual pages. He was paid 30,000 francs by the publisher Harper & Brothers in 1883.

Doré's English Bible (1866) was a great success, and in 1867 Doré had a major exhibition of his work in London. The Doré Gallery in Covelant Bond Street opened after the show. In 1869, Blanchard Jerrold suggested that they work together to make a complete portrait of London. Jerrold got the idea from "The Microcosm of London" produced by Rudolph Ackermann, William Pyne, and Thomas Rowlandson in 1808. Doré signed a five-year contract with the publishers Grant & Co. He had to stay in London for three months each year. He was paid £10,000 a year for the project.

The completed book, "London: A Pilgrimage," was published in 1872. It had 180 engravings. The book was successful financially and influenced many people. However, many critics at the time disliked it. Some of these critics wrote that Doré paid too much attention to the poverty in parts of London. 

His later works included Coleridge's "Rime of the Ancient Mariner", Milton's "Paradise Lost", Tennyson's "The Idylls of the King", "The Works of Thomas Hood", and "The Divine Comedy". His work also appeared in the "Illustrated London News". 

He continued to illustrate books until he died in Paris after a short illness in 1883. He is buried in Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris.

Doré made many works of art. This list is very long, but does not include every piece of art that Doré made. It does not include his sculptures and paintings. Also, many journal illustrations are not listed.




