Dwayne Johnson

Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson (born May 2, 1972 in Hayward, California) is an American actor and semi-retired professional wrestler. He is best known for his work with the WWE.

Johnson began his career as a football player. He played in the Canadian Football League. This only lasted a couple of months before he was let go. He then chose to become a professional wrestler like his father, Rocky Johnson, and grandfather, Peter Maivia. He began working working the WWF and became very well known. He is one of the most popular wrestlers ever. He has won 16 championships. These include both alone and in a tag team. He has also won the Royal Rumble. He was the sixth person to win the WWE "Triple Crown". This means he won all three of the main championships - the WWE Championship, the Intercontinental Championship, and the World Tag Team Championship.

Johnson returned to the WWE on February 14, 2011, when it was said that he was going to be the guest host of Wrestlemania XXVII. At Wrestlemania, He came out after the John Cena and The Miz WWE Championship match ended in a draw. He said it was "time the people got what they want" and restarted the match as a no disqualification match. When the bell rang to start the rematch he hit the "Rock Bottom" on John Cena to let The Miz pin John Cena to keep his championship. After the match The Rock came back in the ring and hit the "People's Elbow" on The Miz to end the show. On the following "Raw", John Cena called out The Rock and challenged him to a match. The Rock accepted his challenge and said that if they are going to fight, they were going to do it at WrestleMania XXVII. The Corre came out after The Rock accepted and attacked both The Rock and Cena, Cena and The Rock fought back and beat The Corre. The Rock defeated Cena at WrestleMania XXVIII. The Rock defeated CM Punk at the 2013 Royal Rumble to win the WWE Championship for an eighth time. He Returned In October to have a face off with Rusev On Raw Only to leave the WWE Universe Again. Many People are still waiting for The Peoples Champ to return. 


Johnson as began acting in 1999. In 2004, he stopped wresting so that he could focus on acting. During this time, he was in many movies. He was also a guest star in some television series. He usually played himself in these episodes. He played the Scorpion King in "The Mummy Returns" and "The Scorpion King". He was also in the movies "Race to Witch Mountain", "The Other Guys", "" and "G.I. Joe - Retaliation".



Johnson is the son of professional wrestler Rocky Johnson. His mother is Samoan. His father is a Black Nova Scotian. Because his father is Canadian, Johnson was given Canadian citizenship in 2009 through changes to the law.


 


