La Romana, Dominican Republic

La Romana is a Dominican city along the Caribbean Sea, in the southeastern part of the country. It is the head municipality of the La Romana province.

The town was built on the right (western) side of the mouth of the river "Dulce" (now also called "Romana").

The municipality had, in , a total population of 130,426: 63,261 men and 67,165 women. The urban population was of the total population, one of the most urban municipality in the country.

La Romana is in the region known as "Llano Costero del Caribe" (in English, "Caribbean Coastal Plain"), with only few low hills and many savannas. The small islands of "Catalina" and "Saona" are part of this municipality but nobody lives in Catalina.

The municipality has a total area of . It has only one municipal district (a subdivision of a municipality): Caleta.

La Romana has the municipality of Guaymate to the north, the La Altagracia province to the east, the Caribbean Sea to the south and the Villa Hermosa municipality to the west.

The altitude of the city of La Romana is above sea level. The city is at to the east of Santo Domingo and at of Higüey.

La Romana has a tropical wet and dry/ savanna climate (Köppen climate classification : Aw) with a pronounced dry season in winter.

The average amount of rainfall for the year in the city is . The month with the most precipitation on average is October with of rainfall, followed by September with .

The driest season is winter. The month with the least rainfall on average is March with an average of and the second is February with .

La Romana is in a warm region; the average temperature for the year is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The municipality of La Romana has only one municipal district:

The most important company in La Romana is the Central Romana that produces sugar. This factory was built in 1917 by the South Puerto Rico Sugar Company.

There is also here an important "Free Trade Zone", a place where there are different companies that made different products to send to other countries and do not pay taxes in the Dominican Republic.

The "La Romana International Airport" is very near the city and there are several important tourist places such as : "Casa de Campo" and "Alto de Chavón".

Sugarcane is an important crop in the municipality and also cattle raising.


