Tom Zbikowski

Thomas Michael Zbikowski (born May 22, 1985 in Park Ridge, Illinois, often known as just "Zibi") is a Professional boxer and American football safety for the Indianapolis Colts of the National Football League. Zbikowski was drafted out of the University of Notre Dame by the Baltimore Ravens with the 86th pick in the third round of the 2008 NFL Draft. He also played for the Baltimore Ravens from 2008 to 2011.

Zbikowski is also a boxer and holds a 4-0 boxing record. Most of his boxing was during the 2011 NFL Lockout. Many Ravens fans enjoyed watching him play as they waited for the lockout to end.

Zbikowski played college football with the Notre Dame Fighting Irish.

Zbikowski made his college debut (start) as a sophomore in 2005, appearing in all 12 games and finished fourth best of the roster with 70 total tackles (37 solo, 33 assisted) with two forced fumbles. He was named Walter Camp Defensive Player of the Week on Sept. 19 following his performance at Michigan State as he had a team-high nine tackles, forced a fumble and returned it for a 75-yard TD and recorded his first career interception.

He was 2006 team captain with Brady Quinn and Travis Thomas and was selected (picked, chosen) to the second-team All-America squad by the Walter Camp Football Foundation after helping the Irish earn a bid in the Sugar Bowl. Zbikowski was also named a third-team All-American by the Associated Press and was a semi-finalist for the Jim Thorpe Award, presented annually ("annually" meaning once a year) to the nation's best defensive back. Zibikowski finished with 79 tackles, recovered a fumble for a touchdown against Penn State, and recorded his third career punt return for a touchdown with 52-yarder against North Carolina. Zbikowski accounted for four TDs (two interception returns and two punt returns) in 12 games played in 2006. He finished fourth on the team with 71 total tackles and led the defense with five interceptions while leading the Irish to the Fiesta Bowl. Following the seasons, Zbikowski earned Third-Team Associated Press All-America honors.

Zbikowski returned to Notre Dame for his fifth year in 2007 with a career high 80 total tackles with a pair of interceptions and fumble recoveries. He continued to shine as a return man, racking up 234 return yards on punts. Graduated in May with degrees in sociology and computer applications.

Zbikowski was drafted by the Baltimore Ravens in the 3rd Round of the 2008 NFL Draft.

Zbikowski played as a returner and defensive back during four fairly solid years with Baltimore. He also intercepted two passes in 2009 while filling in for Ed Reed.

Zbikowski signed with the Indianapolis Colts on March 16, 2012.




