2001 Sino-Russian Treaty of Friendship

The Treaty of Good-Neighborliness and Friendly Cooperation Between the People's Republic of China and the Russian Federation (FCT) is a treaty outlining a twenty-year cooperation between China and Russia. It was signed by the leaders of the two world powers, Jiang Zemin and Vladimir Putin, on July 16, 2001.

The treaty describes actions that should be taken by the two countries to establish for peaceful relations and economic cooperation, as well as diplomatic and political reliance. Article 9 of the treaty has started controversy because it may be viewed as a defense pact, meaning if one of the two countries becomes involved in a war, the other country must help them. Additionally, articles A7 and A16 point at increasing military cooperation, including the sharing of "military know-how" (A16), namely, Chinese access to Russian military technology.

The treaty also describes a mutual, cooperative approach to environmental technology regulations and energy conservation; and toward international finance and trade. The document affirms Russia's stand on Taiwan as "an inalienable part of China" (A5), and highlights the commitment to ensure the "national unity and territorial integrity" in the two countries (A4).

Analysts have pointed out several different reasons for the FCT, mostly involving benefits for both China and Russia.



Both China and Russia fear the United States (especially following its strengthened geopolitical position following the September 11, 2001 attacks) becoming involved in areas which they believe should only be affected by their respective spheres of national influences and interests: for China, this largely involves Taiwan serving as a US client state, while for Russia it involves having various former Soviet Republics as US client states. Many of these do not border either country, though Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan border China, and Kazakhstan borders both.

The United States, Japan and the European Union are three economic powers which have a skilled workforce and access to capital. Russia and China can more effectively compete against these powers in the world economy if Russia has access to Chinese capital and China has access to Russian training and technology.



