Avatar: The Legend of Korra

The Last Airbender: The Legend of Korra is an animated series produced by Nickelodeon about Korra, a hotheaded independent girl and the Avatar after Aang. The series is set 70 years after the defeat of Firelord Ozai in the original series, and is created by Michael DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko. Korra is native to the water tribe, as water succeeds air in the avatar cycle. Korra already has mastered three elements, but has yet to master airbending. She will learn to bend air from Aang's son, Tenzin. Unlike the previous series, "The Last Airbender: The Legend of Korra" is rooted in only one place called Republic City, a place where people of all nations, benders and non-benders, live together. The city has a lot of crime and is rattled by an anti-bender revolt, which serve as challenges for the characters in the show.

Korra - a hotheaded and independent girl. She has mastered water, earth, and fire, but has yet to master air at the beginning of the series.

Tenzin - Korra's airbending teacher and also the son of Aang and Katara, as revealed by the creators of Avatar.

"The Last Airbender: Legend of Korra" takes place 70 years after "Avatar: The Last Airbender". Korra is the next Avatar after Aang, a rebellious girl who is hotheaded, independent and "ready to take on the world". Korra comes from the Southern Water Tribe, and has already mastered Earth, Fire, and Water. Aang and Katara's son Tenzin is her Airbending teacher.

One of the story's settings is Republic City, a "metropolis powered by steam-type technology", "inhabited by people from all four nations". Here Korra must deal with rampant crime and an anti-bender revolt. Mike and Bryan have said that the world of Avatar has "definitely changed, and evolved, and advanced, but we're very conscious of keeping the same feeling. Not totally different, but it's definitely generations later."

The Legend of Korra finally came to an end after four short seasons, with each season averaging around 12 episodes. Even during production with inner conflict inside Nickelodeon, which pushed the creators jump from TV to strictly online; came part way through the series. Whether or not the jump alienated fans or gained more viewers is unknown, but it was an interesting move nonetheless. The series finale occurred on December 19th, 2014. A lot of controversy was drawn out over how the series ended (SPOILER ALERT) due to the fact that in the final scene it implied Asami, and Korra became a couple and got together. This stunt came as a shocker to many and a praise to many, essentially dividing fans who were either against it or for it. You can view the entire series on Nickelodeon.


