Jeremy Morin

Jeremy Morin (born April 16, 1991) is an American professional ice hockey left winger. He currently plays for the San Jose Sharks of the National Hockey League (NHL). He has also played for the Chicago Blackhawks and Columbus Blue Jackets.

Before playing in the NHL, Morin played 2 years with the USA Hockey National Team Development Program (NTDP) and 1 season with the Kitchener Rangers of the Ontario Hockey League (OHL). 

He was drafted 45th overall by the Atlanta Thrashers in the 2009 NHL Entry Draft. On June 24, 2010, the Thrashers traded Morin along with Marty Reasoner, Joey Crabb, their 1st round pick (Kevin Hayes) and their 2nd round pick (Justin Holl) in the 2010 NHL Entry Draft to the Chicago Blackhawks in exchange for Dustin Byfuglien, Brent Sopel, Ben Eager, and Akim Aliu. 

On November 5, 2010, the Blackhawks recalled Morin from the Blackhawks AHL-affiliate team, the Rockford IceHogs. The next day, Morin made his debut in 5–4 shootout win against the Atlanta Thrashers. After 3 days, he was sent back down to the IceHogs.

On November 30, 2010, he was called back up to the Blackhawks to replace the injured Marián Hossa. Before his callup, Morin was leading the IceHogs in goals, with six, and he was tied for third on the team with nine points. Later that day, during a game against the St. Louis Blues, Morin was able to record his first NHL point, after a power play assist, and also recorded his first NHL fight against the Blues' Chris Porter. He played the next 2 games but was sent back down to Rockford on December 6, 2010.

On December 8, 2010, before their game against the Dallas Stars, the Blackhawks recalled Morin while they placed Hossa on injured reserve. During the game against the Stars, Morin was able to score his first NHL goal against Andrew Raycroft in a 5–3 win.

Salary cap was still a concern for the Blackhawks and they had to send Morin back down to Rockford the next day. He would continue to be sent back and called up between Rockford and Chicago before the returns of Hossa and Viktor Stalberg from injury. After their returns, the Blackhawks did not need Morin in the line-up and loaned him to Team USA for the 2011 World Junior Championships. After the tournament was over, Morin returned to the IceHogs but he missed the rest of the season after suffering a concussion in mid-January.

On June 27, 2014, Morin was signed to a two-year contract extension by the Blackhawks.

On December 14, 2014, the Blackhawks traded Morin to the Columbus Blue Jackets in exchange for Tim Erixon.

On June 30, 2015, he was traded back to the Blackhawks along with Marko Daňo, Artem Anisimov, Corey Tropp and a fourth-round draft pick in 2016, in exchange for Brandon Saad, Alex Broadhurst and Michael Paliotta.

On January 3, 2016, Morin was traded by the Blackhawks to the Toronto Maple Leafs in exchange for Richard Pánik.

On February 27, 2016, he was traded to the San Jose Sharks along with James Reimer in exchange for Alex Stalock, Ben Smith and a 4th round pick in 2018.



