Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind

Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind is a 2004 American romantic drama movie set in New York. It was released on March 19, 2004. It was directed by Michel Gondry, a well-known French director of "Human Nature", and the story of the movie was written by Charlie Kaufman of "Being John Malkovich" and "Adaptation" and Pierre Bismuth as well as Gondry. Jim Carrey, famous for his acting in several comedy movies such as "The Mask" and "Bruce Almighty", and Kate Winslet, a heroine of "Titanic", starred in this movie as main characters both of whom are struggling to erase their memories of love. 

The story of this movie is about memory erasure of a couple who once loved each other but now, suffer from the memories of their love. Joel Barish (Jim Carrey) decides to erase his memory about his girlfriend, Clementine Kruczynski (Kate Winslet), after he discovered that she had removed all of her memories about him. He goes to see Dr. Howard Mierzwiak (Tom Wilkinson) of Lacuna Inc., a firm that helps people erase their painful, heartbreaking memories with a special brain map processing, and asks the doctor to erase his memory. However, while the memory erasure is ongoing, he faces with their earlier memories that are so passionate, sweet and precious that they should never be deleted. Although Joel tries to wake up and stop getting rid of her from his mind, Dr. Mierswiak and his employees keep going on the process. Joel eventually gets to the last memory, disappearing with the last words of Clementine saying, “Meet me in Montauk.” Other than the story of main characters, the staff members of Lacuna Inc. such as Mary (Kirsten Dunst), and Patrick (Elijah Wood) also have some related stories which will be a key for the ending of this movie. 

The director tells people two quotes by Mary’s words in the movie. The first one is from Friedrich Nietzsche’s saying, “Blessed are the forgetful, for they get the better even of their blunders.” The second one is from Alexander Pope’s poem, “How happy is the blameless vestal's lot! The world forgetting, by the world forgot. Eternal sunshine of the spotless mind! Each prayer accepted, and each wish resigned.” The title of this movie, “Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind” is from this quote.



