Jewish Virtual Library

Jewish Virtual Library (JVL) is an online encyclopedia published by the American-Israeli Cooperative Enterprise (the AICE). Established in 1993, it is a comprehensive website covering Israel, the Jewish people, and Jewish culture.

The website was first made in the late 1990s. It was first called The Jewish Student Online Research Center (JSOURCE).According to the website, the Library covers material that cannot be found anywhere else in the world, such as information about projects where the United States and Israel worked together, and how Americans were treated during the Holocaust. It explains that it got permission to use materials from the Library of Congress, from the American Jewish Historical Society, the Anti-Defamation League, the Simon Wiesenthal Center, the Israeli Foreign Ministry, and Prime Minister’s Office, Rabbi Joseph Telushkin (author of "Jewish Literacy"), and dozens of other sources.

It has more than 13,000 articles and 6,000 photographs and maps about Jewish history, Israel, U.S.-Israel relations, the Holocaust, anti-Semitism, and Judaism. The website has all of the words of the Tanakh. The Jewish Virtual Library also has the Israel advocacy text "Myths and Facts", edited by Mitchell Bard, in several languages.

John Jaeger, in an article published by the Association of College and Research Libraries, said of the Jewish Virtual Library: "This library, once it is entered, is more like a living encyclopedia than it is anything else. One has options to click on, such as history, women, biography, politics, Israel, maps, and Judaic Treasures at the Library of Congress, with each launching a person into a different realm. The site is extremely well put together.

Karen Evans of Indiana State University wrote that the site covers many different topics, with "easily accessible, balanced information".

The Jewish Virtual Library has been used as a source by CNN, New York Times, BBC, CBS News, Fox News, "The Los Angeles Times", "USA Today", "Business Week", and Bloomberg, among others. JVL got awards from Britannica "Internet Guide Selection", "USA Today" "Hot Site", and the "Best of the Jewish Web" from the Jewish Agency for Israel, the" Academic Excellence Award" from Study Web and others.



