Seton Hall University

Seton Hall University is a private Roman Catholic university in South Orange, New Jersey, United States. It was started in 1856 by Archbishop James Roosevelt Bayley. Seton Hall is the oldest diocesan university in the United States. Seton Hall is also the oldest and largest Catholic university in New Jersey. The university is known for its programs in business, law, education, nursing, and diplomacy.

Seton Hall is made up of eight different schools and colleges. It has about 5,200 undergraduate students and about 4,400 graduate students. Its School of Law has 1,200 students. "US News & World Report" lists the School of Law as one of the top 100 law schools in the United States.In 2011, Seton Hall's Stillman School of Business is ranked 88 out of the top 100 undergraduate business schools. It is #3 in the state of New Jersey according to BusinessWeek.

The Seton Hall College of Medicine and Dentistry was the first school of medicine in the State of New Jersey. The state took over the school in 1965. It is now the New Jersey Medical School, part of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.

The school's sports teams are called the Pirates. They play in the NCAA's Division I and in the Big East Conference. The college started its first basketball team in 1903. Seton Hall stopped having a football team in 1982. 

Seton Hall athletics is best known for its men's basketball team. The team won the National Invitation Tournament (NIT) in 1953. It lost in the finals of the 1989 NCAA Tournament to Michigan, 80–79 in overtime. Seton Hall currently has teams at the Division I level in baseball, basketball, women's basketball, cross country running, men's golf, soccer, women's soccer, softball, swimming, diving, women's tennis, indoor and outdoor track & field, and volleyball.

Seton Hall also has club sports in ice hockey, rugby union, and Men's volleyball. Almost all the Seton Hall sports have their home field on the South Orange campus. The men's ice hockey team and the men's basketball team play at the Prudential Center in Newark, New Jersey.


