Rick Riordan

Richard Russell "Rick" Riordan, Jr. (born June 5, 1964) is the author of the "Percy Jackson and the Olympians" series. He also wrote the "Tres Navarre" mystery series for adults and helped to edit "Demigods and Monsters", a collection of essays on the topic of his Percy Jackson series. He helped develop the 10 books in "The 39 Clues" series, published by Scholastic Corporation, and wrote the first book in the series, "The Maze of Bones".

Riordan was born in San Antonio, Texas. He graduated from the University of Texas at Austin where he double-majored in English and history. For fifteen years, he taught in public and private schools in California and in San Antonio. He was awarded St. Mary's Hall's first Master Teacher Award in 2002.

Riordan is the multi-award-winning author of the Tres Navarre mystery series for adults; his "The Maze of Bones" reached number one on the New York Times Best Seller list on September 28, 2008. His "Percy Jackson and the Olympians" series features a twelve-year-old boy who discovers he is the modern-day son of an ancient Greek god. Film rights were purchased by Twentieth Century Fox and a feature film was released on February 12, 2010. Riordan lives in San Antonio with his wife and their two sons. Recently, Riordan has stated that he is working on a new series based upon the Egyptian pantheon, which then turned out to be "The Kane Chronicles", with the first book, "The Red Pyramid", to be released May 4, 2010. He also won 13 awards the Anthony Award for Best Paperback Original, the Goodreads Choice Awards Best Middle Grade & Children's ( 5 times 2011-2015 ), Edgar Award for Best Paperback Original ( 5 times 2011-2015 ), Hampshire Book Award, and the Shamus award for best first PI novel!



Note:This is the first and last book series written by Rick Riordan,rest of the books were written by 2 other authors with him.



Note: This book series is the sequel to Percy Jackson & the Olympians.




To know more about the author and his books go to www.rickriordan.co.uk



