Super Paper Mario

Super Paper Mario is a video game developed by Intelligent Systems and published by Nintendo with Ryota Kawade as the director. This game is from the "Paper Mario" series and is the third one to be released with the particularity to be a platformer while the other games were role playing games (RPG). It was released in 2007 for the Wii.

In this game, the player controls Mario and his companions and has to explore different lands of a town called Flipside, fights enemies to gain levels and solves puzzles. As the story progresses, Princess Peach, Luigi and even Bowser become playable."Super Paper Mario" is a 2D and 3D game since one of Mario’s abilities is to change the perspective of the environment.

Once again, Princess Peach is kidnapped but this time the culprit is not Bowser but a new villain named Count Bleck who is associated with Dimentio. His evil plan is to destroy all worlds and to achieve his plot, he opened a black hole known as The Void that will eventually swamp the entire universe. The player's quest is to stop him by collecting the eight Pure Hearts that can be found in each chapter of the story.

In each "Paper Mario" game, there have always been members that follow Mario and help him in battles. This time his allies are pixls. Pixl is a name that comes from the word pixel but is also a reference to pixie, which is a name for a fairy. Each pixl has a different power and look but despite having many members, the player can only have one of them at a time. In "Super Paper Mario", Tippi, also called Tiptron, is the player's first partner and looks like a butterfly and has the ability to give tips to Mario and makes invisible objects appear. There are twelve other pixls that can be unlocked as the story gets deeper.

Most of the reviews for "Super Paper Mario" were positive such as IGN that gives a score of 8.9 out of 10. Most critics praised the plot because it has a great sense of humor but said that the graphics were fine but not extraordinary. The game has sold more than 2.28 million copies worldwide.


