The Three Caballeros

The Three Caballeros is a 1944 animated movie produced by Walt Disney Productions and distributed by RKO Radio Pictures. The movie premiered in Mexico City on December 12, 1944. The seventh animated movie in the Disney animated features canon, it shows an adventure through parts of Latin America, combining live-action and animation. This is the second of the Disney package movies of the 1940s.

The movie is made up as a series of self-contained segments, strung together by the device of Donald Duck opening birthday gifts from his Latin American friends. Several Latin American stars of the movie's time appear, including singers Aurora Miranda (sister of Carmen Miranda) and Dora Luz, as well as dancer Carmen Molina. It again starred Donald Duck, who in the course of the movie is joined by old friend José Carioca, the cigar-smoking parrot from "Saludos Amigos" (1943) representing Brazil, and later makes a new friend, a rooster, Panchito Pistoles, representing Mexico.

The music of the Mexican part of the movie was written by Mexican composer Manuel Esperon, who wrote the score for over 540 Mexican movies in the Golden Age of Mexican Cinema. Walt Disney, after having seen his success in the Mexican movie industry, called him personally to ask him to participate in the movie. The main song for the Mexican part is "Ay Jalisco, No Te Rajes!", one of Esperon's most famous songs. The movie received two Academy Award nominations for Original Music Score and Best Sound.

It is Donald Duck's birthday. He receives three presents. The first present is a movie projector, which shows him a documentary on birds. The next present is a book given to Donald by Jose Carioca himself. This book takes them to Bahia. The third present is a piñata given to Donald by Panchito Pistoles. In the piñata, there are many surprises. The celebration ends with Donald Duck being fired away by firecrackers in the shape of a bull (the firecrackers are lit by Jose with his cigar).

Throughout the movie, we see a voiceless character called the Aracuan Bird at random moments. He usually bothers everyone, sometimes stealing Jose's cigar. His most famous gag is when he re-routes the train by drawing new tracks. He returns three years later in Disney's "Melody Time".






