Eastbourne College

Eastbourne College is a British co-educational day and boarding school for children aged 13-18. It is on the south coast of England. The headmaster is called Simon Davies. The College was started by the Duke of Devonshire in 1867 and has been growing ever since. It is a charity.

"Ex Oriente Salus"

The Chapel follows the religion of the Church of England. The College has a very good choir.
It also has a full-time Chaplain. Since he lives with his family in the middle of the College campus, he is always available. Pupils are always welcome to visit him about anything that is bothering them. Sometimes people go just to talk and enjoy a cup of tea.

Every Thursday evening there is a communion service followed by warm pizza in the Chaplain's flat at which all are welcome. There is also a Bible study group (The Connection) led by members of staff, which meets weekly throughout the year. At the beginning and end of each term there is a whole school service in All Saints' Church.

Sports are taken very seriously at Eastbourne College and in the past it has produced many successful teams. Old Eastbournians Will Green and Mark Lock once won the Premiership with the London Wasps. 

At the College, one main sport is played each term.

However there are also other sports played, such as football, cross country, swimming, golf, tennis, squash, rowing, sailing & rugby fives.

The school has a CCF (Combined Cadet Force) which all of year ten must join, and some students choose to continue in the upper years. The CCF has Royal Navy, Army and Royal Air Force sections for the pupils to choose from.





Two Old Eastbournians have won the Victoria Cross:

The Southern Railway used to use trains' names for publicity, and carrying pupils to boarding schools at the beginning and end of school terms was a big part of the traffic. One type of train was named after various English public schools. The fifteenth train of this type made, "no. 914", was named "Eastbourne" after the college. Built at Eastleigh in October 1932, "no. 914" was working until July 1961.



