Foix

Foix (; ) is a commune, the former capital of the County of Foix. Today it is the préfecture of the Ariège department in southwestern France in the Occitanie region.

It is to south of Toulouse, close to the border with Spain and Andorra. The city is only the second city of the department after Pamiers. Of all French "préfectures", Foix is the one with fewest people living in it.

The Romans built a fort on the rocky hill where the Château de Foix castle now the town. The town of Foix probably owes its origin to an oratory founded by Charlemagne, which afterwards became the Abbey of Saint Volusianus in 849. The current area of the department was part of the old County of Foix.

The city of Foix lies in the foothills of the Pyrénées mountains, in southern France. It is on the confluence of the Ariège and Arget rivers. Foix is at to the south of Toulouse.

The "commune" has an area of . Its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is .

The "commune" of Foix is surrounded by the "communes" Arabaux, Cos, Crampagna, Ferrières-sur-Ariège, Ganac, Montgaillard, Pradières, Saint-Jean-de-Verges, Saint-Pierre-de-Rivière and Vernajoul.

The climate of Foix, in the Köppen climate classification, is Cfb - Oceanic climate with template summers.

The inhabitants of Foix are known, in French, as "Fuxéens" (women: "Fuxéennes").

Foix has a population of 6,9,721 (2014), and population density of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Foix

Foix forms, with other 5 "communes", the urban area of Foix with a population of 14,552 inhabitants (2013) and an area of . This urban area is the centre of the metropolitan area of Foix, formed by 17 "communes" with a population of 18,406 inhabitants (2013) and an area of .

Foix is the prefecture of the Ariège department, the capital of the "arrondissement" of Foix and the administrative centre () of the canton of Foix (with 13,700 inhabitants in 2014).

It is part of the intercommunality "Pays Foix-Varilhes" ().

Foix is twinned with:





