List of Formula One constructors

The following is a list of Formula One constructors. These are constructors which have competed or plan to compete in the FIA World Championship.

In Formula One racing the terms "constructor" and "entrant" do not mean the same thing. A "constructor" builds a car or engine. An "entrant" is the person or corporate entity that enters a race. They register a car and driver with the FIA. They are responsible for making the car ready to race, and keeping the car in good condition during the race weekend. Because of the role and activity of the entrant, the term "team" is often used when talking about an entrant.

Under the FIA rules, "the constructor of an engine or chassis is the person (including any corporate or unincorporated body) which owns the intellectual rights to such engine or chassis." Basically, who ever builds an engine or a chassis in the constructor. The title of Formula One World Champion Constructor is given to the car "make" that scores the most points during the season. The "make" of a car includes both the chassis and engine. 

If a car's chassis and engine are made by the same entity, then the constructor is the car make. For example Ferrari makes both the chassis and the engine. So the make is Ferrari. If the chassis and engine are made by different entities, the car's make is both constructor names put together. For example McLaren builds a chassis that uses a Mercedes engine. So the make is McLaren-Mercedes. The name of the chassis constructor is always placed before the engine constructor. 

Because both engine and chassis are included in the make name, chassis run with different engines are counted as two separate makes. For example, Lotus-Ford is a make different from Lotus-BRM. Each make would be scored separately. The World Constructors' Championship title is awarded to the constructor of the "chassis" of the make that scores the most points. This list only shows chassis constructors for that reason. For more information on engines, see Formula One engines.

Since the early 1980s, the FIA requires that Formula One entrants own the intellectual rights to the chassis that they enter. Basically, that means that temas must build their own chassis. Since this time, the terms "entrant", "constructor", and "team' now mean the same thing. Before this time, constructors were free to sell their chassis to other teams. Brabham and Lotus chassis were used by many other teams during the 1960s and 1970s. Several teams than compeated with the front-runners never built their own chassis. Rob Walker Racing Team was the most successful example. They earned the first victories in Formula One for both Cooper and Lotus. 

In those days, the concept of a "works" or "factory" team was the official team of the company producing the cars. Customer teams were entrants that purchased their cars off the shelf. In modern Formula One, the team must build their own car. The term customer only applies to engines now.

There have been some cases since the 1980s where one company built cars for another team. Lola designed and built cars for Larrousse and Scuderia Italia in the late 1980s and early 1990s.

Key: 

Key: 
Constructors whose only entry in the World Championship was in the Indianapolis 500 from 1950 to 1960. All were American-based.
The following teams never built their own chassis. They are not considered "constructors":

a. Includes John Surtees' fastest lap in the South African Grand Prix in a non-works McLaren.
b. In 1949 and 1950, AFM participated in the German Formula 2 championship.
c. Constructors' World Championship points not awarded prior to .
d. From to , Alta was also an engine manufacturer for teams HWM, Cooper and Connaught.
e. Arrows was renamed Footwork for to . In they returned to Arrows.
f. In and , ATS was an engine manufacturer for teams Derrington-Francis and Cooper, racing at the 1964 Italian and 1967 British Grands Prix with Mário de Araújo Cabral and Silvio Moser.
g. BAR was formerly Tyrrell; it later became Honda, then Brawn, then Mercedes GP.
h. Benetton was formerly Toleman; it later became Renault F1.
i. From through Benetton F1 Team had a United Kingdom license; from through , an Italian one.
j. Coloni later became Andrea Moda.
k. The nationality of Eagle, Penske, Shadow and Wolf is questioned.
l. Frank Williams Racing Cars includes Politoys (), Iso Marlboro (-) and Wolf-Williams () cars. Prior to 1972 FWRC ran customer chassis. Later became Wolf. Williams Grand Prix Engineering, now WilliamsF1, was a new constructor established by Frank Williams and Patrick Head after Williams left Wolf-Williams.
m. Jaguar was formerly Stewart Grand Prix; it later became Red Bull Racing.
n. Jordan later became Midland F1 Racing, then Spyker, then Force India.
o. Does not include Kurtis' Indianapolis 500 (1950-1960) entries.
p. Leyton House was formerly March Engineering.
q. Ligier later became Prost Grand Prix.
r. Lola includes Larrousse () and Mastercard Lola () entries.
s. March later became Leyton House Racing. In March returned for one final season.
t. Midland was formerly Jordan Grand Prix; it later became Spyker F1, then Force India.
u. Minardi later became Scuderia Toro Rosso.
v. Monteverdi was formerly Onyx Grand Prix.
w. Onyx later became Monteverdi.
x. Osella later became Fondmetal.
y. Prost was formerly Ligier.
z. Sauber later became the BMW works team as BMW Sauber. In they returned to Sauber.
aa. Spyker was formerly Jordan Grand Prix and Midland F1 Racing; it later became Force India.
ab. Stewart later became Jaguar Racing.
ac. Toleman later became Benetton Formula.
ad. Tyrrell later became British American Racing.
ae. Wolf was formerly Frank Williams Racing Cars.
af. In and Scuderia Platé built their own engines for the Maserati-Platé 4CLT.

All statistics and other data drawn from:


