Marie Thérèse of Austria

Marie Thérèse of Austria, Infanta of Spain, Infanta of Portugal, "Archduchess of Austria""' (María Teresa; 10 September 1638 – 30 July 1683) was the daughter of Philip IV, King of Spain and Elisabeth of France. She was Queen of France as wife of King Louis XIV and mother of "Le Grand Dauphin". During her lifetime in Spain, she was painted by the renowned painter, Diego Velázquez. Married to Louis XIV in 1660 following the Franco-Spanish War she played little part in politics during her lifetime. The Bourbon Claim to the Spanish Throne which sparked of the War of the Spanish Succession in 1700 stems from her. She also acted as regent of France for her husband at least once during her tenure as queen consort. 

Born María Teresa, she was the only surviving daughter of Philip IV, King of Spain and Elisabeth of France. By birth she was she was an Infanta of Spain, Portugal and Archduchess of Austria and member of the Spanish branch of the House of Habsburg. 

María Teresa, Infanta of Spain and Archduchess of Austria married Louis XIV of France by proxy on 3 June 1660 at Fuenterrabia. Her father Philip IV and the entire Spanish court accompanied the María Teresa to the Isle of Pheasants in Bidassoa, where Louis XIV and his court met her. On 7 June 1660, she departed from her native country of Spain. On 9 June she married Louis XIV in a religious ceremony at Saint-Jean-de-Luz in the "Saint Jean Baptiste" church, which had recently been rebuilt for the occasion. Known as Marie Thérèse d'Autriche, she had a six children with Louis XIV but he would never love her. Marie Thérèse lived a quiet life with her Spanish attendants and had to put up with her husbands various affairs, notably with Louise de La Vallière and Madame de Montespan. She is a direct ancestor of the present Spainish King Felipe VI. 

During the last week of July 1683, Marie Thérèse fell ill. Marie Thérèse, Archduchess of Austria and Infanta of Spain by birth died a painful death on 30 July 1683 at Versailles in the arms of Madame de Maintenon. She was buried at the Royal Basilica of Saint Denis outside Paris on 3 September 1683. Her tomb was destroyed during the French Revolution. 


Her third daughter was named after her as well as a "Princess of the French royal blood" Marie Thérèse, Princess of Conti.


