Marley &amp; Me (movie)

Marley & Me is a 2008 American comedy-drama movie that is produced by Gil Netter and Karen Rosenfeltand was directed by David Frankle. The movie opened in theaters on December 25, 2008 and set a record for the largest Christmas Day box office open ever with $14.75 million in ticket sales.

The movie is based on the novel and is about a couple, John (Owen Wilson) and Jenny Grogan (Jennifer Aniston) who just get married and move from Michigan to Florida. They get jobs at a local newspaper and Jenny wants a baby so their co-worker, Sebastian Tunney (Eric Dane) suggest they get a puppy before they have a baby to see if they will be good parents. They go shopping for puppies and come across a litter of newborn yellow Labrador Retrievers, They decide to chose Marley and Marley immediately becomes a handful so they take him to dog trainer Ms. Kornblut (Kathleen Turner) and when Marley doesn't listen to her commands she expels him from her dog class.

Editor Arnie Klein (Alan Arkin) offers John a twice-weekly column in which he can discuss things that are fun and not fun about everyday living. After having writer's block, John notices the misadventures of Marley and thought that it might be the perfect topic for his first piece. Arnie agrees, and John settles into his new position.

Marley continues to give John new material for his column by causing havoc on the house and readers loved it. Jenny becomes pregnant but the baby dies in her first trimester so they decide to take a belated honeymoon to Ireland and leave Marley with a dogsitter and becomes a handful for the dogsitter because of the thunderstorms that are around there. Upon returning from their honeymoon Jenny finds that she is pregnant again and gives birth to a boy, Patrick. Jenny also has a second child Connor and quits her job to become a stay-at-home mom and John take the daily column at work to increase their paycheck. With the crime rate near their home, John and Jenny move to a house in a safer neighbourhood in Boca Raton. Jenny is experiencing all the signs of postpartum depression though she denies it and grows impatient of Marley and John and thinks they should give Marley away while John asks Sebastian to take care of him but Jenny realizes that Marley has become a indispensable part of the family and decides that he can stay. Sebastian takes a job in New York for "The New York Times" and moves. A couple years later Jenny has a third child a daughter, Colleen. The family moves to Pennsylvania when John takes a job for "The Philadelphia Inquirer" with Jenny's approval. Life is good until Marley begins to have arthritis and deafness and develops an attack of gastric dilatation volvulus though he survives it he has another attack and it was clear that surgery would not help the situation, John has Marley euthanised while beside him. The family bury Marley under a tree in their front yard after paying their last respects to him.


"Marley & Me" got mostly positive reviews from reviewers:






