Fettuccine Alfredo

Fettuccine alfredo is a pasta dish made from fettuccine pasta tossed with Parmesan cheese and butter.

This is an old and simple recipe, in Italy it is simply called "Fettuccine al burro" (). The Italian restaurateur Alfredo di Lelio doubled the amount of butter used. This made it easier for his pregnant wife to eat. He then started selling his variation at his restaurant "Alfredo alla Scrofa" in Rome.

Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks ate at "Alfredo alla Scrofa" on their honeymoon, and this helped make the restaurant, and Fettuccine alfredo, popular with tourists.

In U.S. cuisine it may be mixed with other ingredients such as broccoli, parsley, cream, garlic, shrimp, or chicken.

Fettuccine Alfredo is named for Alfredo di Lelio, an Italian restaurant owner. He ran a restaurant in Rome in the first half of the 20th century. 

In 1914, his wife, who was pregnant, was having difficulty eating so he adapted a meal of pasta and butter, "pasta al burro", for her. Later, he put the dish on the menu at his restaurant, the "Alfredo alla Scrofa", and called his version Fettuccine Alfredo. Hollywood celebrities Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks visited his restaurant on their honeymoon and eat the dish. When they returned home, they talked often about the dish. This caused the restaurant and the dish to become popular with American tourists.

In 1943, Di Lelio sold the restaurant but kept the right to the name and menu. In 1950, Alfredo Di Lelio reopened a new restaurant "Il Vero Alfredo" in Rome, Piazza Augusto Imperatore 30. He worked there until his death in 1959. "Il Vero Alfredo" is now managed by his nephews Alfredo and Ines, with the famous “gold cutlery”” (fork and spoon gold) donated in 1927 by two well-known American actors Mary Pickford and Douglas Fairbanks (in gratitude for the hospitality).

Fettuccine Alfredo has now become ubiquitous in Italian-style restaurants in the United States and internationally, although in Italy this dish is not popular at all, as wrongly believed, and it is better known if called "Fettuccine al burro" instead of "Fettuccine Alfredo"


