Total Drama Action

Total Drama Action is the 2nd season in the Total Drama television series. It started on June 11, 2009. The players on the show are Geoff, Bridgette, Izzy, Trent, Gwen, Owen, Heather, Le-Shawna, Courtney, Beth, Lindsay, Justin, Harold, Duncan, DJ,

Like the previous season, much of "Total Drama Action" chronicles the events of the eponymous fictional reality shows. The "Total Drama" series itself is an "animated reality television series", which stars the cast and crew of the fictional series, parodying many aspects of reality television in general.

After last season's winner, Owen (Scott McCord), forgoes his prize money of C$100,000 for a challenge (open to all 22 of "Total Drama Island"'s contestants) in which the winner would receive C<nowiki>$</nowiki>1,000,000, the money was left in limbo after a situation resulted in a 14-way tie. As such, show host Chris McLean (Christian Potenza) had no choice but to commission a second competition with all 14 tied contestants. The contestants are told to arrive at an abandoned movie studio lot in Toronto, where the new competition, titled "Total Drama Action", would take place. Because of its location, Chris tells the contestants that the challenges would all be in the form of various movie genres. The accommodations of the contestants are handled by Chef Hatchet (Clé Bennett) in a similar manner to how it was handled in the previous season.

After a quick elimination of two contestants, the couple Geoff (Dan Petronijevic) and Bridgette (Kristin Fairlie), a second challenge determined the team captains of the two competing teams: the Screaming Gaffers, headed by Gwen (Megan Fahlenbock), and the Killer Grips, headed by Trent (Scott McCord). From then on, challenges would alternate between "reward challenges" where winners would receive a special prize, and "elimination challenges" where the losing team would vote off one of its own in an elaborate "Gilded Chris Ceremony". The pattern of reducing the contestants down was briefly interrupted on two occasions: once when Izzy (Katie Crown) was reinstated following a voting irregularity where her alter-ego, "E-Scope", was voted off, and another time when Courtney (Emilie-Claire Barlow), a contestant who did not originally qualify for "Total Drama Action", successfully sued the show. The players eliminated would make the "walk of shame" and into the "Lame-o-sine", where they leave the movie studio.

Once seven contestants were left, the Screaming Gaffers and the Killer Grips were dissolved, and the challenges became individual-oriented in nature. Chris hired Owen as his ringer to sabotage the other contestants and to create drama. Eventually, two contestants were left standing: Beth (Sarah Gadon) and Duncan (Drew Nelson). The Total Drama Action winner was Duncan. Beth wins in the alternate ending.

Sprinkled among the episodes (taking the place of reward challenges) is "TDA Aftermath", a show-within-a-show hosted by Geoff and Bridgette, commissioned shortly after their eliminations. On "TDA Aftermath", Geoff and Bridgette interview eliminated contestants on their "Total Drama Action" experiences. They are accompanied by the contestants of "Total Drama Island" that did not qualify for "Total Drama Action", as well as other previously-eliminated contestants. "TDA Aftermath" consisted of various "never-before-seen footage" sequences (purportedly taking place during the events of previous episodes), as well as two recurring segments, "That's Gonna Leave a Mark" (a segment of the contestants getting badly hurt), and "Truth or..." (in which a contestant is interviewed and are hurt if they lie to the hosts or the studio audience).

When the field eventually narrowed down to two contestants, (Beth and Duncan), a final obstacle course challenge would lead the contestants into the Aftermath set, with the first one arriving winning the show's million-dollar grand prize. Unfortunately, Beth and Duncan had sufficiently cooperated enough though the final challenge to arrive at the same time, and what was meant as a season recap became a show in which the winner would be determined. After efforts by the eliminated and nonparticipant contestants to come up with an impartial way of determining the winner all fail, Chris (supposedly leaving on vacation) ultimately returns to the set and has the eliminated (but not the nonparticipant) contestants vote for the winner who was eventually Duncan.


