Avatar: The Last Airbender (video game)

Avatar: The Last Airbender (known as Avatar: The Legend of Aang in Europe) is a video game based on the for Game Boy Advance, Microsoft Windows, Nintendo GameCube, Nintendo DS, PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable, Wii, and Xbox. 

The game was a launch title for the Wii in Western territories (USA).

The "Avatar: The Last Airbender" video game allows the player to control one of four characters - Aang, Katara, Haru, or Sokka - in a single-player adventure. Each character uses his or her own fighting style. He or she can get new special powers through experience from defeating enemies. Many different items can help the player during battle (armor, chi, enchanted accessories, and healing potions). 

The console versions of the game were developed by THQ Studio Australia.


Aang, a 12-year-old boy, is the main hero of the story. He is the present Avatar (the spirit of the planet as a human). As the Avatar, Aang must master all four elements to bring peace to the world and stop the war, which started 100 years ago. Katara, Sokka and Haru helped him to do it. Many characters from the show appear on this game such as Prince Zuko. However, Zuko had a small part in the game, only appearing in cutscenes. King Bumi also appears in the fourth level.

While training in the North Pole, Aang and Katara hear reports of a waterbender, Hiryu, going missing, which they investigate. They arrive at the Water Tribe as a Fire Nation ship attacks, led by Prince Zuko. They are able to fend off the attackers, but Katara is captured during the battle. Aang and Sokka follow the ship, but are slowed by a Firebending machine.

They follow the ship to an Earth Kingdom port and they free Katara, who informs them of another prisoner named Lian the Maker, who is being forced to make machines for the Fire Nation. When they arrive at Lian’s cell, they find it empty, except for a map to an Earth Kingdom village.

They find the village under attack by machines. After fending off the machines, picking up Haru and being informed that one of his earthbending friends Yuan was kidnapped, they travel to the library of Omashu for clues to where the machines might originate from. The information from the library leads them to an uncharted island.

On the island, they find Lian, making more machines. She fears that Aang will not be able to master all four elements before Sozin’s comet arrives. Aang refused her help, seeing as how the machines were disrupting villages. Lian then voiced her contempt for him as she sends a machine to fight them to flee to the Air temple, attempting to destroy the Avatar statues. They stop Lian, but Katara, Sokka, and Haru are captured by another machine.

Aang pursues Lian and the machine to a fortress. After Aang rescues his friends, they find Zuko, also captured by a machine. Upon rescuing him, Zuko attacks the group, but he is knocked over. After that, Aang enter the Avatar State and killed Lian.



