Paul Stanley

Paul Stanley (born January 20, 1952 in is an American hard rock guitarist and singer for hard rock band Kiss.

Born in Manhattan, New York City, U.S., on January 20, 1952 in a family dedicated to Jewish jewelry. He moved to Queens, New York City in 1960. His father was part of the Parsons Junior High School "with the hope that graduates from a good profession, there is outstanding for its artistry, but not liked by his teachers mostly by his haircut. Paul was heavily influenced by The Beatles and the Rolling Stones image and was coming little by little the world of rock'n'roll, something good was that his parents did not put down and entered the "High School for Music and Arts in the late 60s. He played in his garage Elvis songs with his guitar brand "Phil" of poor quality he got for his birthday. After a while playing in a cover band called "Uncle Joe", was taken to a gang of older boys to record a single for CBS.

During his musical training, he met Chaim Witz to change his name to Eugene Klein, born in Israel, in Haifa, which would later be known as Gene Simmons, with whom he did not get along at first, were sharing tastes and ambitions to be great friends, a friendship that has lasted until today. When he was unemployed played with Gene in the streets for a Big Mac. After it was founded with Stanley Eisen, Gene Simmons and Stephen Coronel, the band Wicked Lester who are about to make a record is broken by both the dismissal of Stephen as the lack of money (initially Gene played guitar, as the remaining members were also guitars, Gene used bass. The band Wicked Lester can not be what Paul and Gene are looking for, so look for members to start a new band revolutionary and unique, so Gene one day reading the Rolling Stone magazine is a bit peculiar announcement and decide to contact Peter Crisscuola (Peter Criss) who is willing to be even dress up as a ridiculous but lovable cat, so now just need a member who would lead guitar, so I arranged an audition and find a crazy, lonely brain called Paul Daniel Frehley (Ace Frehley) and the Kiss finally formed. They released their first album in 1973 called Kiss.



