Ganesha

Ganesha or (Ganesh) is the elephant-headed god in Hinduism. He is the son of Shiva and Parvati.

Ganesha is a very popular god of Hindus He's the best and most worshipped God in Hinduism . Hindu tradition states that Ganesha is a god of wisdom, success and good luck. He is also giver of different types of favours. The Hindu tradition calls Ganesha as the Vighneshvara. "Vighneshvara" in Sanskrit language means one who is the lord of obstacles or difficulties. Thus, the Hindu tradition states that by worshiping Ganesha, one can remove all obstacle and difficulties and he's the writer of Vishwanath ashtakam . is the best god in Hinduism and most worshipped God. And the writer of Vishwanath ashtakam. Ganga Taranga RamaniYAA JatakaLApam GowRI nirantara vibushitha VAma bagam Narayana Priya mananga maDApaharam Vaaranasi Purapathim bhaja Vishwanatham:

VAchamagocharamaneka guna swarupam vaHEsha vishnu surasevitha paadaPItam vaMEna vigraharena kaltra vantham Vaaranasi Purapathim bhaja Vishwanatham:

BHOtadipam bhujaga bhushana bhushitangam vyaGRAjinambaradaram Jatilam trinetram PAAshankushabhaya varaprada shula bhanim Vaaranasi Purapathim bhaja Vishwanatham:

SHIthamsishobhita kiRIta virajamaanam halekshanana na vishobhita panchabhanam nagadiPA rachita bhasura karna pooram Vaaranasi Purapathim bhaja Vishwanatham:

PAnchananam duritha mattha mathanga janaam nagaanthakam dhanuja pungava pannaganam DHAvanalam marana shoka jaRAtaveenaam Vaaranasi Purapathim bhaja Vishwanatham:

THejomayam saguna nirguna madviTHeeyam anandakandamapirRAjitha maprameyam naGAAtmakam sakala nishkamalamaathma roopam Vaaranasi Purapathim bhaja Vishwanatham:

ASHAAM vihayaa parivruthya parathya nindam uperachincha sunivarya mana samaadhow AGHAya hruthkamala madya gatham pravesham Vaaranasi Purapathim bhaja Vishwanatham:

raGAAdidhosha rahitha swajananu raagam vyragya shanti nilayam girija sahayam madhurya dhairya subhagam garalaa bhiramam Vaaranasi Purapathim bhaja Vishwanatham:

Vaaranasi purapathe thavanam sivasyaa: vyasokthamastaka mitham patitha manushya vidyamkriyam vipula sowkyamanantha KEErthim samprapya dheha vilaye labhathecha moksham

Vishwanathashtaka mitham ya: pate:siva sannidhow siva loka mavaa:pnowthi sivena: saha modhathe:

Om Shanthi Shanthi Shanthi hi: Hara hara Maha deva shambho shankara.
And The Ganpati Suktam in Sanskrit. आ तू न॑ इन्द्र क्षु॒मन्तं॑ चि॒त्रं ग्रा॒भं सं गृ॑भाय ।
म॒हा॒ह॒स्ती दक्षि॑णेन ॥ ८.०८१.०१
वि॒द्मा हि त्वा॑ तुविकू॒र्मिं तु॒विदे॑ष्णं तु॒वीम॑घम् ।
तु॒वि॒मा॒त्रमवो॑भिः ॥ ८.०८१.०२
न॒हि त्वा॑ शूर दे॒वा न मर्ता॑सो॒ दित्स॑न्तम् ।
भी॒मं न गां वा॒रय॑न्ते ॥ ८.०८१.०३
एतो॒ न्विन्द्रं॒ स्तवा॒मेशा॑नं॒ वस्वः॑ स्व॒राज॑म् ।
न राध॑सा मर्धिषन्नः ॥ ८.०८१.०४
प्र स्तो॑ष॒दुप॑ गासिष॒च्छ्रव॒त्साम॑ गी॒यमा॑नम् ।
अ॒भि राध॑सा जुगुरत् ॥ ८.०८१.०५
आ नो॑ भर॒ दक्षि॑णेना॒भि स॒व्येन॒ प्र मृ॑श ।
इन्द्र॒ मा नो॒ वसो॒र्निर्भा॑क् ॥ ८.०८१.०६
उप॑ क्रम॒स्वा भ॑र धृष॒ता धृ॑ष्णो॒ जना॑नाम् ।
अदा॑शूष्टरस्य॒ वेदः॑ ॥ ८.०८१.०७
इन्द्र॒ य उ॒ नु ते॒ अस्ति॒ वाजो॒ विप्रे॑भिः॒ सनि॑त्वः ।
अ॒स्माभिः॒ सु तं स॑नुहि ॥ ८.०८१.०८
स॒द्यो॒जुव॑स्ते॒ वाजा॑ अ॒स्मभ्यं॑ वि॒श्वश्च॑न्द्राः ।
वशै॑श्च म॒क्षू ज॑रन्ते ॥ ८.०८१.०९

ग॒णानां॑ त्वा ग॒णप॑तिं हवामहे क॒विं क॑वी॒नामु॑प॒मश्र॑वस्तमम् ।
ज्ये॒ष्ठ॒राजं॒ ब्रह्म॑णां ब्रह्मणस्पत॒ आ नः॑ शृ॒ण्वन्नू॒तिभिः॑ सीद॒ साद॑नम् ॥ २.०२३.०१

नि षु सी॑द गणपते ग॒णेषु॒ त्वामा॑हु॒र्विप्र॑तमं कवी॒नाम् ।
न ऋ॒ते त्वत्क्रि॑यते॒ किं च॒नारे म॒हाम॒र्कं म॑घवञ्चि॒त्रम॑र्च ॥ १०.११२.०९
अ॒भि॒ख्या नो॑ मघव॒न्नाध॑माना॒न्सखे॑ बो॒धि व॑सुपते॒ सखी॑नाम् ।
रणं॑ कृधि रणकृत्सत्यशु॒ष्माभ॑क्ते चि॒दा भ॑जा रा॒ये अ॒स्मान् ॥ १०.११२.१०

ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥

There are many temples (mandirs) of Ganesha, however in many Hindu temples there are statues and carvings. But, in most of the temples of Hindus, people worship Ganesha. Hindu Tradition gives Ganesha an important place. The tradition says that Hindus should worship their religious functions and ceremonies because he is the god of all obstacles. Generally, many Hindus also worship Ganesha before starting any new thing. Thus, for example, before occupying a new house, they may worship Ganesha. Likewise, before starting any new business, many Hindus may worship Ganesha for good luck.

There are two mythological stories about Ganesha.

A story says that Parvati had made a boy out of the dirt of her body, since she was cursed that she could not have a child again.The boy of dirt became alive. This boy was guarding the way while Parvati was taking a bath, as Parvati told the boy to guard the place and don't allow anyone to come in.Shiva wanted to meet his wife, Parvati. The boy did not allow him. Shiva became angry. He cut off the head of the boy. Then as Parvati came out and exclaimed that this was her son, and Shiva sent his men to look for a human head in the forest to replace Ganesha's. His men brought him a elephant head. Then, the head of an elephant was fixed to make the boy alive again. Therefore, Ganesha has a head of an elephant.

The other story is this. Parvati was very proud of her son Ganesha. She asked Shani (god of the planet Saturn) to look at her son. Shani looked at the face of Ganesha. Shani’s look burnt Ganesha’s face—he had the evil eye—and Ganesha became headless. Then Brahma (the creator god of Hindus) advised Parvati to fix Ganesha with the first head of anything she could find. Parvati found a head of an elephant. This head she fixed on the body of Ganesha. Thus, Ganesha got an elephant’s head.

Ganesha was having a race with his brother Kartikeya. The first one to go around the world would be the winner. Kartikeya raced off the next day, but Ganesha stayed and thought about how he could win. Eventually he sat on his mount, a rat, and went round his parents(who represent the whole world in Hindu scriptures) seven times. Thus, Ganesha was declared the winner due to his intelligence.

Any picture, image or portrayal in any form of Ganesha generally has the following characteristics or features:
He is often different in each picture, unlike most Hindu gods.

Ganesha has several other names. Some of his names are:




