Nonverbal communication

Nonverbal communication (NVC) is sending and receiving wordless messages. Language is not the only way to communicate, there are other means. Much nonverbal communication is unconscious: it happens without thinking about it.
NVC can use gestures and touch, body language or posture, facial expression and eye contact. NVC can be communicated through objects such as clothing and hairstyles. Dance is also a type of nonverbal communication. 

Speech has nonverbal elements known as paralanguage. These include voice quality, emotion and speaking style, rhythm, intonation and stress. Likewise, written texts have nonverbal elements such as handwriting style, spatial arrangement of words, or the use of emoticons, such as :).

Nonverbal communication has three main aspects: the situation where it takes place, the communicators, and their behavior during the interaction.

Verbal means 'the use of words'. Thus, vocal sounds that are not words, such as a grunt, or singing a wordless note, are nonverbal. Sign languages and writing are understood as verbal communication, as both make use of words — although like speech, paralinguistic elements do occur alongside nonverbal messages. Nonverbal communication can occur through any sensory channel — sight, sound, smell, touch or taste. NVC is important because:

"When we speak (or listen), our attention is focused on words rather than body language. But our judgement includes both. An audience is simultaneously processing both verbal and nonverbal cues. Body movements are not usually positive or negative in and of themselves; rather, the situation and the message will determine the appraisal".
Spoken language is often used for communicating information about external events, but non-verbal codes are more used in interpersonal relationships. According to Argyle, there are five primary functions of nonverbal bodily behavior in human communication:

Paralanguage is the study of nonverbal cues of the voice. Various acoustic properties of speech such as tone, pitch and accent, collectively known as prosody, can all give off nonverbal cues. Paralanguage may change the meaning of words.

The linguist George L. Trager developed a classification of voice set, voice qualities, and vocalization.

Clothes, and fashion generally, send messages. We judge others by what we see, at least when we first meet them. Fashion is a reflection of the time and place. The styles show as much about history and the time period as any history book. Clothes reflect on what people think, and how they live. Fashion is a nonverbal statement. It reflects our time, our beliefs and sometimes our religion.

Body language means how your body is held: the "stance". It tends to show your attitude (state of mind) to what is going on round you. Others pick up the signs in a flash. 

Eye contact can indicate interest, attention, and involvement. Gaze includes looking while talking, looking while listening, amount of gaze, and frequency of glances, patterns of fixation, pupil dilation, and blink rate.

Showing strong emotions is powerful communication which is immediately understood. Many of the signals are the same in all cultures, as Darwin showed. Examples of strong emotions shown visually are:
These are listed in order of clarity. No-one mistakes anger or fear, but more subtle emotions may sometimes be missed by the onlooker.

Touch is classic nonverbal communication. It is perhaps the most intimate (closest) thing one person can do to another. What it means depends on the context. Here is a short-list of what we may do when we touch another person:

Most of the arts are forms of non-verbal communication:


