Garhwal

'Garhwal Land ' () is a region. It is in the state of Uttarakhand India. Garhwal's name is taken from Garhs (or forts). This is because this region had 52 forts belonging to local chiefs who ruled small areas near their forts. People who belong to this region are known as Gharhwalis. Now, this region is being looked onto as a tourist hub of India. This land has the districts Tehri, Chamoli, Uttrakashi, Pauri, some parts of Dehradun, and other areas. 

The history of Garhwal goes back to the dawn of Hindu civilization, but most of history of Garhwal is fairly unknown or not given any importance by historians. Also, some facts known about this land are vague and taken from Garhwali folk songs and Hindu epics. Most historians say that the name of Garhwal comes from the ancient regimes and rulers. However, most of the facts are unknown, and the things that "are" known are very vague and unreliable.
MARODA is a very Important village of Pauri District. It is only from Devpryag which is a holy place for Hindus as it is the starting point of the Holy river Ganga. Though the inhabitants of Maroda are well settlled in Delhi for their studies and Jobs but still they are very deeply attached with this village and the tradition and culture of the uttarakhand.

Garhwal is mostly known as the land of sacred Devi Devta (gods) because the holy river Ganges, Yamuna comes from here and Char Dhams (Holy Pilgrimage) Badrinath, Kedarnath, Gangotri and yamunotri are found here along with Panch Paryags (Lands where merging of Holy Rivers take place). These Paryags are Deoparyag, Rudraparyag, Karanparyag, Nandparyag and Vishnuparyag. There are also some Shaktipeeths like Dhari Devi, Mathiyana, Kunjapuri, Surkunda and Punch Badri Kedarnath, Madhya Maheswer, Tungh Nath, Rudra Nath, Kalpeshwer and Panch Badri Adi Badri, Vridha Badri, Bhavisya Badri, Yog Badri, Badri Vishal.

Garhwal is motherland of most of Gharwali people and language spoken by Garhwalis is also known as Garhwali. Most of the Garwalis are villagers and depends upon agriculture.Village in Garhwal are combine among some areas which is known as "Patti" for example Patti Bhillang may contain more than 30 villages. Garhwal land is facing troubles of unemployment and therefor most Garhwali youngsters migrate to the cities. Administration for education is fairly poor however some improvements are there but not so impressive as other states.Health and medical services need to be improved and cultivation is totally depends upon rain and rainfall is not consistent.

The culture and dialect of Garhwal is different in different areas. The culture and dialect of one area can be different from another area but an important part of the culture is Hinduism. Hinduism is the soul of Garhwali culture. Garhwali culture is influenced a lot by Epics and Devi Devta.


