Jane Lynch

Jane Lynch (born July 14, 1960) is an American comedian, actress and singer. Since 2009, she has played Sue Sylvester in the Fox musical-comedy series "Glee" for which she has won an Emmy Award and a Golden Globe Award. She has also acted in comedy movies such as "Best in Show", "The 40-Year-Old Virgin" and "Role Models", as well as television shows as lawyer Joyce Wischina in "The L Word", Dr. Linda Freeman in "Two and a Half Men" and Diana Reid on "Criminal Minds". She has appeared on "iCarly" as Sam's mother. She was also a regular on the comedy-drama series "Party Down" as Constance Carmell; the role got good reviews.

Lynch was born and raised in Dolton, Illinois, the daughter of a homemaker mother and a banker father. She was raised in an Irish Catholic family and went to Thornridge High School. She got her bachelor's degree in theatre from Illinois State University and her MFA in theatre from Cornell University.

Lynch spent fifteen years in Chicago, acting in the Steppenwolf Theatre Company, and touring with The Second City comedy troupe. She played Carol Brady in "The Real Live Brady Bunch". She also wrote and starred in the award-winning play "Oh Sister, My Sister".

Her breakthrough movie role was as Christy Cummings, the butch lesbian personal dog handler to trophy wife Sheri Ann Cabot (Jennifer Coolidge) in director Christopher Guest's mockumentary "Best in Show" (2000). She also appeared in Guest's "A Mighty Wind" (2003) as porn actress-turned-folk singer Laurie Bohner and in "For Your Consideration" (2006) as an entertainment reporter.

Lynch is also a television actress. She starred with John Hannah and William Fichtner in 2002's "MDs", and has made guest appearances in many television shows, including "L.A. Law", "Judging Amy", "The West Wing", "7th Heaven", "Friends", "Dawson's Creek", "Felicity", "Arrested Development", "Lovespring International", "Two and a Half Men", "Weeds", "Boston Legal", "The L Word", "Criminal Minds", "Help Me Help You", "Gilmore Girls", "The New Adventures of Old Christine", "Psych", "Monk" and "Party Down", among others.

In 2005, Lynch was named as one of POWER UP's "10 Amazing Gay Women in Showbiz."

Audiences and critics took notice of Lynch for her oddball role in Judd Apatow's "The 40-Year-Old Virgin". She told "Fresh Air"'s Terry Gross the role was originally intended for a man but, at the urging of Steve Carell's wife Nancy Walls, was offered to Lynch instead. Since then, she has starred in a series of movies including "Role Models", "", "Alvin & the Chipmunks", "", "Space Chimps", "The Rocker", "The Hammer", "Another Cinderella Story", "", and "Spring Breakdown".

In "Julie and Julia", she played the role of Dorothy McWilliams, Julia Child's sister. "Entertainment Weekly" dedicated an article on their website toward the possibility of her performance receiving an Academy Award nomination.

Beginning 2009, Lynch appeared on the Fox show "Glee". She won glowing reviews for her role as the aggressive cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester. Mary McNamara of the LA Times wrote, "Lynch alone makes Glee worth watching." Before her work with "Glee", she was a series regular on the Starz comedy "Party Down". Though the series was renewed for a second season, Lynch would not be returning because of her work on "Glee". On December 15, 2009, Lynch received a Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actress in a Series, Miniseries, or Television movie for her role on "Glee". She lost to Chloë Sevigny. The series itself also received nominations in three other categories. On August 29, 2010, Lynch won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress - Comedy Series.

Lynch hosted "Saturday Night Live" on October 9, 2010; the news of her hosting was accidentally revealed to her by her "Glee" boss, Ryan Murphy, by text message. Lynch also guest starred on the Nickelodeon show "iCarly" as Pam Puckett, Sam Puckett's mother, in the episode "iSam's Mom".

Lynch appeared at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards on September 12, 2010.

In January 2011, Lynch was awarded the Golden Globe in The Best Supporting Actress in a Series, Miniseries, or Television movie Catergory. She also started appearing in Comcast's XFinity ads that are shown on both the Internet and television in the United States, mainly with two different laptops and two different colored Persian cats.

Lynch, who is openly lesbian, married clinical psychologist Dr. Lara Embry on May 31, 2010 at the Blue Heron Restaurant in Sunderland, Massachusetts. On June 10, 2013, Lynch announced they were divorcing. Embry herself received publicity surrounding a custody battle over two children with her former partner.




