Team Umizoomi

Team Umizoomi is a American-Canadian animated series is an Noggin from January 31, 2010 until August 22, 2016. that started on Nickelodeon on August 3, 2009. The series targets children aged 2 to 8 and focuses on math skills. Nickelodeon announced that "Team Umizoomi" will be returning for a second season sometime in Fall 2010 or the beginning of January 2011.

A smart and imaginative 6 year old girl, whose voice is provided by "Sofia Fox" . Milli is usually the one to interact with the child viewing the show when it is necessary to complete the next element in a move in order to accomplish something. Her ponytails can be used to measure things, which is initiated by singing "Milli-Measure". She can also sing make her dress into any pattern by saying, "Pattern of,-insert pattern here!" and can apply the pattern on her dress to any object by singing "Pattern Power!" She's a friend of Bot and sister of Geo.

Milli's brother, voiced by Ethan Kempner, a 5 year old boy who zooms everywhere on his Super Skates. Geo wears a shape belt containing many different kinds of shapes and can create anything. Often, when Team Umizoomi is stuck and needs some type of vehicle to assist them, Geo will figure out what they need, and present a blueprint for the thing that needs to be built, and then interact with the child viewing the show to figure out which building supplies are needed to fill in the

A loving robot friend (whose voice is provided by Donovan Patton, better known as "Joe" from "Blue's Clues") who loves to sing and dance and has a fun-loving, childlike personality. Ironically, his abilities are more functional than math-related. His arms and legs can be extended to reach things, by saying "Arms Extendo" or "Legs Extendo". He has a small receiver (like a satellite dish) on his head to receive calls (called the Umi Alarm). He also has a screen on the front (called a "Belly Belly Belly Screen") that they can view videos/pictures on as well as have a video call with someone who needs their help. He also has a storage compartment on the back of his body, called a Bot-o-mat, which frequently is carrying whatever the team happens to need. In each episode, he is introduced, usually by Milli, as their "Best Robot Friend". 


