Potter Park Zoo

The Potter Park Zoo is a zoo in Lansing, Michigan. Potter Park Zoo is the oldest public zoo in Michigan. The zoo is in size. The zoo has more than 160 species of animals. The zoo is owned by the City of Lansing, and operated by Ingham County. The zoo is a member of the Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA).

Potter Park Zoo was dedicated on July 5, 1915. The zoo officially opened in 1920.

The Bird and Reptile building opened in 1929. In 1930 the Lion building opened. The bighorn sheep exhibit (originally called Monkey Island) was constructed in 1936. The aviary was constructed in 1941. The barnyard and petting zoo opened in 1949. In the 1950s, Potter Park Zoo had 138 mammals and 267 birds.
In the late 1960s, the zoo began a decline from municipal neglect. In 1969 a columnist of the "Lansing State Journal" encouraged residents to raise money for the zoo.

A magellanic penguin exhibit opened in 1985. In 1986 the zoo became a member of the American Association of Zoos and Aquariums (AZA). In 1989 the zoo's Lion House was renovated and renamed the Feline and Primate Building.
In 2005 endangered tiger cubs were born at the zoo. They were featured on NBC's Today Show. In 2005 the "River Otter" and "Arctic Fox" exhibits opened. In November 2006 Lansing transferred the operation and maintenance of the zoo to Ingham County.
In January 2009 the zoo announced plans to expand the eastern black rhinoceros exhibit. In 2009 the "Wings from Down Under" aviary opened with more than 600 Australian birds. In March 2010 Potter Park Zoo artificially inseminated a female snow leopard. It is believed to be the first successful procedure without surgery or anesthesia. A larger Eurasian Eagle-owl exhibit opened in September 2010. 

Potter Park Zoo's Feline and Primate Building has two Amur tigers, African lions, snow leopards, mandrills, Pallas' cats, cotton-top tamarins, black-headed spider monkeys,golden lion tamarins, mongoose, red-ruffed, and ring-tailed lemurs.
The Bird and Reptile House has rare flying creatures like Bali starlings, chestnut-fronted macaws, eastern screech owls, Eurasian eagle owls, green aracaries, Jambu fruit doves. There are scaly species like chukwallas, inland bearded dragons, leopard geckos, blue-tongued skinks, Gila monsters, water dragons, boa constrictors, green tree pythons, and more. 

The Coral Reef Room, showcases exotic fish, crustaceans, eels, and coral.

The Farmyard EdVentures is where children can pet and feed animals at the barnyard and petting zoo. The petting zoo has goats, burros, reindeer, yaks, toy pigs, tortoises, and rabbits.

The Wing From Down Under aviary has grass parakeets, cockatiels, and eastern rosellas.

Gardens and a pond have ducks, geese, swans, and pelicans. Other animals at the zoo are kangaroos, penguins, river otters, bongos, bald eagles, eastern timberwolves, red pandas, arctic foxes, and porcupines.



