Kobie van Rensburg

Kobie van Rensburg (* in Johannesburg) is a South African tenor and opera director. 
Van Rensburg studied singing with Werner Neel at the Northwest University of South Africa, but also law and international politics at Potchefstroom University for Christian Higher Education.
He made his debut in 1991 at the age of 20 as Belmonte in Mozart's "Die Entführung aus dem Serail" for the Roodeport City Opera. In 1996, he started an engagement at the Gärtnerplatztheater in Munich. Since the year 2000 van Rensburg has been working regularly with the Lautten Compagney Berlin (director: Wolfgang Katschner). With this ensemble he staged Monteverdi's "L'Orfeo" and published three recordings. Since 2011 van Rensburg collaborates with a different emsemble for Ancient and New Music, called "così facciamo". With them he staged Handel’s "Ariodante".
He sung his first name part as and in Mozart’s Idomeneo in 2006 for the New York Metropolitan Opera. Van Rensburg‘s repertoire focuses on Baroque music.
However, he has also made his mark in song and Lied interpretation, focusing on English Baroque composers (i.e. Dowland, Byrd, Purcell), as well as German composers Beethoven, Schumann and Schubert, to name only a few.

At the Munich Gärtnerplatztheater van Rensburg staged, together with the librettist Peer Boysen the pasticcio "Ein Theater nach der Mode" in 2002, featuring compositions by Handel and other Baroque composers. In 2006 he gave his directorial debut in the Opernhaus Halle with Monteverdi‘s "L'Orfeo, in which he also sang the name part. Handel‘s first oratorio "Il Trionfo del Tempo e del Disinganno" was staged in 2009 in Passau by van Rensburg. His latest directorial work includes Handel’s opera Ariodante, premiered in February 2011 at the Munich Cuvilliés-Theater. Just like in his former own production "Il Pianto d'Orfeo" van Rensburg links the expressiveness of dancing with the music of the composition. The dancer serves as an Alter ego to the singer and thereby illustrates the emotions of the character he or she impersonates.




