Dangerous (Michael Jackson album)

Dangerous is the eighth studio album by Michael Jackson, released on November 26, 1991 on Epic Records. Dangerous has sold over 32 million albums worldwide, 7 million albums were shipped in the United States alone. It was his fastest selling album in the US. It was the best selling album in the world of 1992.

Dangerous was the first album to be produced fully by Michael Jackson. Since 1979, Jackson's albums had been produced by Quincy Jones. The album has a New Jack Swing sound.

"Rolling Stone" gave the album four out of five stars. The themes of the lyrics on the album include social justice, lust, romance, and religion.

9 singles were released: "Black Or White", "Remember The Time", "Jam", "In The Closet", "Heal The World", "Who Is It", "Will You Be There", and "Gone Too Soon". "Dangerous" was going to be released but wasn't because of Jackson's personal problems. The album's singles were more successful in the United Kingdom and other countries than in the United States.

The album's first single "Black or White" went to number one. The second single was "Remember the Time". The music video had Eddie Murphy and Iman in it.

The third single from "Dangerous" was "In the Closet". It reached number six in the Billboard Hot 100. The black British model Naomi Campbell danced with Jackson in the video.

Dangerous' fourth single "Jam" reached number twenty-six in the Billboard Hot 100. In other countries it was more successful. In Spain it reached number one. Big D rapped on the song.

"Who Is It" was released as the album's fifth single. It reached number fourteen in the Billboard Hot 100.

"Will You Be There" was on the soundtrack of "Free Willy". It features The Cleveland Orchestra.

In 2009 Michael Jackson died and lots of people bought his music. "Dangerous" reached number 78 in the Swiss Singles Chart.

The album was nominated for four Grammy Awards. "Will You Be There" won the MTV Movie Award for "Best Song in a Movie" in 1994.



