Nevers

Nevers is a "commune" in the Nièvre department in the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region in central France. It is the "préfecture" (capital) of the department.

It is the main city of the department and one of the largest city of the region, after Dijon and Chalon-sur-Saône.

The name of the city comes from the name of the "Nièvre" river. Julius Caesar named the town as Noviodunum but later was named as Nebirnum, after the name of the river.

Nevers was the capital of the old province of "Nivernais" and became the capital of Nièvres on 4 March 1790 with the creation of the departments in France.

Nevers is at about to the southeast of Paris, on the confluence of the Loire and the Nièvre rivers.

It has an area of , and its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is .

Nevers is surrounded by the "communes" Varennes-Vauzelles, Coulanges-lès-Nevers, Saint-Éloi, Sermoise-sur-Loire, Challuy and Marzy.

The Köppen climate classification type for Nevers is an "Oceanic climate" (also known as Maritime Temperate climate) and of the subtype Cfb.

The average temperature for the year in Nevers is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month, on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Nevers is . The month with the most precipitation on average is May with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is February with an average of .

The inhabitants of Nevers are known, in French, as "Nivernais" (women: "Nivernaises") but they are also known as "Neversois" (women: "Neversoises"), leaving Nivernais for the people of the department.

With a population of 34,485, Nevers has a population density of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Nevers

Nevers forms, together with other 6 "communes", the urban area of Nevers with a population of 59,444 inhabitants (2013) and an area of . This urban area is the centre of the metropolitan area of Nevers, formed by 57 "communes", with a population of 100,768 inhabitants (2013) and an area of .

Nevers is the prefecture of the Nièvre department, the capital of the "arrondissement" of Nevers and the administrative centre () of four cantons:

It is part of the intercommunality "Nevers Agglomération" ().

Nevers is twinned with:

Some interesting places in Nevers are:




