Professional wrestling attacks

This page describes the different types of attacks in professional wrestling.

A bell clap is a move where a wrestler slaps both of the ears of an opponent at the same time with the palms of their hands, mess up their balance. A bell clap is usually used to escape a bear hug.

A body press or splash, is a move where a wrestler falls against their opponent with the middle of their body. A body press can either be used from wither a running or a jumping position. It uses momentum and weight to impact the opponent, and most versions can be transitioned into a pin. It is a plancha in lucha libre.

A big splash is a type of splash where the wrestler jumps forwards and lands stomach-first on their downed opponent.

A body avalanche is where a wrestler charges into their opponent that is in the corner of the ring. The wrestler performing the body avalanche does not leave their feet during the move.

A crossbody or crossbody block is a move where a wrestler jumps onto their opponent and lands horizontally across their torso, forcing them to the mat and sometimes resulting in a pinfall attempt. There is also an aerial version, called the diving crossbody, where wrestler will leap from a high position towards their opponent.

A Lou Thesz press is a move where a wrestler jump towards a standing opponent and knocks them over, it results in the opponent lying on their back with the attacking wrestler sitting on the opponent's chest. A version of the Lou Thesz press involves the wrestler jumping on a running opponent and repeatedly striking the opponent in the face while in the mounted position. This version was made popular by Stone Cold Steve Austin. The original move was invented, popularized and named after Lou Thesz.

A stinger splash is where a wrestler runs at their opponent, who is upright in the corner, and jumps forward so that they splash their whole body stomach-first into their opponent, crushing them between the attacking wrestler and the turnbuckle. The move is also known as a corner splash.

A tilt-a-whirl crossbody is where a wrestler, that is being held and spun into a tilt-a-whirl by the opponent, falls down and pushes the opponent down back-first against the canvas after reaching a certain point where he is horizontally positioned against the opponent's torso. The move is uncommon and is a counter to the tilt-a-whirl backbreaker/tilt-a-whirl mat slam.

A vertical press is where a wrestler does a jumping attack against a standing opponent and lands against the opponent's upper body while remaining upright, and bringing them down to the mat into a vertical splash (seated senton) position.

A bronco buster is where a wrestler jumps in the corner on a seated opponent, straddles their opponent's body, and bounces up and down on their opponent's chest. The move is usually treated as having either comic or sexual meaning rather than as a legitimately painful move, the latter mostly true during some matches that involve female wrestlers.

The koronco buster is a move similar to the bronco buster where the wrestler jumps onto their standing opponent in the corner, straddles and sits on their opponent's chest, and rests their feet on the second rope. The attacking wrestler then follows up with mounted punches.

A backhand chop or knife edge chop is when a wrestler uses a backhand wing and slaps the chest of their opponent with the palm of their hand. The move was popularized by Ric Flair an the crowd always responds to a backhand chop with a "Wooo!" noise.

A cross chop is a version of the backhand chop where the wrestler runs and lunges forward in a crossbody-type position, crosses their arms in an "X" fashion and then hits a double backhand chop on the opponent.

A forehand chop, frying pan chop or open-hand chop is a move where the wrestler slaps the chest of their opponent with their forehand.

A kesagiri chop is a move where the wrestler does a downward diagonal backhand chop to the side of their opponents neck.

A Mongolian chop is a move where a wrestler 'karate chops' both of the opponent's shoulders and sides of the neck with their hands' edges in a swinging motion at the same time.

An overhead chop, brain chop or tomahawk chop is a move where a wrestler draws their hand back and hits their opponent vertically with a backhand chop. It usually hits the opponent's head.

A clothesline happens when a wrestler runs toward their opponent and extends their arm out to hitting the opponent in the neck or chest while knocking them over. It is often confused with a lariat.

A cactus clothesline is a type of clothesline that was used by Mick Foley during his "Cactus Jack" gimmick which it is named after. The wrestler performing the move charges at their opponent who is against the ring ropes and clotheslines them. Both the force and momentum of the charge knocks both the wrestler and their opponent over the top rope and onto the floor.

A corner clothesline is a move where a wrestler, instead of knocking into a standing opponent, charges against them in the corner.

A flying clothesline is where a wrestler runs towards their opponent, leaps into the air and hits a clothesline. There is another version of this where a wrestler leaps into the air and hits a clothesline on the opponent leaning against the corner turnbuckle.

A rebound clothesline is where the opponent run to the ropes on one side of the ring and rebounds off of them. The wrestler doing the move then runs to the same ropes, rebounds off of them and as the opponent turns around to face to the wrestler, the attacker hits the opponent with a clothesline.

A short-armed clothesline, short clothesline or short-range clothesline is a type of clothesline where a wrestler Irish whips their opponent but holds onto their arm. When the opponents arm is completely extended, the wrestler pulls their opponent back and hits a clothesline with the other arm. The move can also be used the same way but with an arm wrench or wrist lock replacing the Irish whip.

A springboard clothesline is a type of clothesline where a wrestler jumps onto a rope, springboards off of it and clotheslines their opponent. The most common version is where a wrestler is on the apron, goes to the top rope, and hits it on the opponent either in the ring or onto the floor. Another version is where a wrestler jumps to the second rope, springboards off over the top rope, and then clothesline their opponent on the apron. There are many different versions of the springboard clothesline.

A three-point stance clothesline is where a wrestler lines up in a three-point stance, charges at the opponent and clotheslines them.

A double axe handle, Double Sledge, Polish Hammer or Double Axe Hammer is a move where a wrestler clutches both of their hands together, swings them at their opponent and hits a part of them. The name Polish Hammer came from Ivan Putski. There is also a top rope version.

Drops are types of moves where a wrestlers either jumps or falls down onto their opponent on the floor and lands with a specific part of the body.

A chop drop is where a wrestler either falls forward, or jumps up and drops down, and hits a lying opponent with a backhand chop on the way down. The attacking wrestler usually lands on their knees.

An elbow drop is where a wrestler jumps or falls down onto their opponent while driving their elbow into anywhere on the opponent's body. A common type of elbow drop is where a wrestler will raise one elbow before they fall to one side and strike it across the opponent. Another common type of elbow drop is where a wrestler raise both of their elbows up and drop them directly forward either dropping one, or both elbows onto the opponent. This one is known as the pointed elbow drop.

A corkscrew elbow drop is where a wrestler raises one of their elbows before they fall and twist around as they fall to one side, striking their opponent with the elbow anywhere on their body. Sometimes, the attacking wrestler will swing one of their legs around before they fall, to gain momentum for the corkscrew twist.

A spinning headlock elbow drop is where a wrestler, after applying a headlock, performs any type of elbow drop. The most well known version of this is the inverted facelock elbow drop where a wrestler puts their opponent into an inverted facelock, turns 180°, and drops their elbow across the opponent's chest, driving them down to the mat. Another version of the move is where a wrestler uses their whole arm as a lariat instead of just the elbow. A side headlock can also be executed from a jumping position, and twisted around into a sitout lariat

A fist drop is a move where a wrestler either jumps or falls down on an opponent and drives their fist into anywhere on the opponent's body.

A forearm drop is where a wrestler jumps down onto an opponent and drives their forearm into anywhere on the opponent's body.

A headbutt drop is a move where a wrestler either jumps or falls down onto an opponent and drives their head into anywhere on the opponent's body.

A knee drop is a move where a wrestler either jumps or falls down onto an opponent and drives their knee into anywhere on the opponent's body. The move is usually sold as more powerful if the attacking wrestler bounces off the ropes first. A type of knee drop called the Knee drop bulldog is where wrestler places one of their knees against the base of the leaning opponent's neck and dropping. This forces the opponent's head down to the mat, while the wrestler lands on the opponent's upper body, and drives their knee to the neck of their opponent. There is also a diving version.

A leg drop is where a wrestler either jumps or falls and lands so that the back of their leg hits across either the opponent's chest, throat, or face.

An elbow attack is where a wrestler uses either their elbow of back elbow to attack opponent's chest, face, neck, etc.

A back elbow or reverse elbow is a move where a wrestler stands with their back to either a standing or a running opponent and strikes the opponent with the back of the elbow.

The bionic elbow is a mover where a wrestler jumps or falls from a higher position and drops to the floor, dropping the point of their elbow right on the opponent. The move is banned from many mixed martial arts organizations, including the UFC and Strikeforce.

A corner back elbow is a move where a wrestler strikes their back elbow to an opponent in the corner, lying (facing inwards or outwards the ring) against the corner. The move is usually struck from a wrestler that is running.

A discus back elbow is a move where a wrestler that is facing away from the opponent, spins around to face away from the opponent and strikes the opponent in the face with a back elbow.

A discus elbow smash or roaring elbow is where a wrestler facing away from the opponent, spins 180°, and hits their opponent with an elbow smash. Another version of the move is where a wrestler that is first facing the opponent, spins a full 360° to face the opponent again to hits them with an elbow smash.

An elbow smash is where a wrestler makes a punching motion, tucks their hand towards their chest so the elbow and forearm make contact. The elbow smash can be used as a replacement for punches because hitting opponents with a clenched fist is illegal in most wrestling matches.

A mounted elbow drop is where a wrestler approaches an opponent in the corner, and climbs up to either the second or top rope beside the opponent with one of their legs on either side of the opponent. The wrestler jumps off the ropes, and hits a bionic elbow on either the opponent's head, neck (if the opponent's neck is bent-down) or shoulder.

A short-arm elbow smash is a version of the elbow smash where a wrestler Irish whips their opponent but holds on to their arm. After the opponent's arm is completely extended, they wrestler pulls the opponent back and hits them with an elbow smash while using their other arm. The move can also be used in the same way but instead of an Irish whip, it is replace with either an arm wrench or wrist lock. It is used by grabbing hold of one of the opponent's arms, pulling it back towards the wrestler and elbowing them with the spare arm.

A facewash is a move where a wrestler rubs the sole of their boot across the face of the seated opponent in the bottom corner turnbuckle. The wrestler then runs and rebounds off of the opposing ropes, charges at the opponent and does either a running front kick, a running knee, a running low-angle big boot, a running low-angle single leg dropkick, or any other striking move.

A forearm club is a move where a wrestler uses one of their hands to take a hold of an opponent by either their head or hair. They then lean the opponent forward while extending their other arm, clench their fist and throw the arm down onto the opponent, either hitting the back of their head of neck. There is lesser used version of this move where the wrestler takes hold of the opponent, leans them backwards to expose their chest and clubs their chest.

A forearm smash is when a wrestler charges at their opponent and hits them in either the chest or face with a forearm to force them back and down to the mat.

A flying forearm smash is a where a wrestler runs towards an opponent (usually bouncing off the ropes), leaps into the air and hits the opponent with a forearm smash.

A sliding forearm smash is where a wrestler runs towards an opponent (usually bouncing off the ropes), does a slide across the mat and hits their opponent with a forearm smash.

A headbutt is where a wrestler uses their head to hit an opponent in a part of their body. It is usually used to hit the head or skull to daze them. Unlike a actual headbutt, the professional wrestling version usually impacts with the opponent's forehead and counts on the superior hardness of the wrestler's head as well as the momentum that is delivered to hurt the opponent without hurting the attacking wrestler.

A battering ram is where a wrestler stands and faces an upright opponent. The wrestler then lowers their head, either jumps or charges forwards and drives the top of their head into their opponent's abdomen. It can also be used as a double-team move.

Trapping headbutts are where a wrestler holds both of the opponent's arms under their own and hits the opponent with a series of headbutts. The opponent is not able to counter it.

A knee strike is where a wrestler strikes their opponent using their knees. The idea of using knees as an offensive move is popular throughout British wrestling.

A Go 2 Sleep or Go to Sleep (often abbreviated to "GTS") is a move where the wrestler places their opponent in a fireman's carry and drops the opponent in front of them. While their opponent is falling, the wrestler lifts a knee up and striks the opponent in the face. KENTA, the creator of the move, also uses an inverted version where he lifts the opponent up into an Argentine backbreaker rack, throws them forward, and strikes the back of the opponent's head with his knee. Former WWE superstar CM Punk popularized the move.

A double knee is where a wrestler charges towards their opponent and strike them in either the head, chest or back with both of their knees.

A high knee is where a wrestler charges towards their opponent, jumps up, and raises their knee so it hits either the side of their face or head. The move has been closely associated with Harley Race and is often referred to as a "Harley Race-style High Knee".

A shining wizard is where a wrestler delivers a knee strike to an opponent that is down on one knee. The wrestler steps off of the opponent's raised knee with one of their feet and swings their other leg so it strikes the opponent's head with either the side of their knee or shin. There a slight version of this where the wrestler uses a running enzuigiri to the kneeling opponent's head without the use of the opponent's knee for leverage. That version is known as a Shining Apprentice. The move can also be used on a standing opponent as well. The standing version is likely applied by stepping off of the opponent's chest and delivering a knee to their face. The move was created by Keiji Mutoh, otherwise known as the Great Muta

A spinning knee, discus knee, or rolling knee is where a wrestler moves towards their opponent, performs a 360° spin and uses the momentum that they gained to deliver a jumping knee strike to their opponent's head. The maneuver can be delivered to either a sitting or standing opponent.

A hip attack, butt bump, or butt thump is a move where a wrestler gains a running start, jumps into the air, spins around, and thrusts their pelvis backwards, hitting either the opponent's head or chest with their hip or buttocks.

A kick is where a wrestler uses the foot, knee or leg to strike any part of the opponent's body.

A back kick or reverse side kick is a move where a wrestler that is facing their opponent, turns 180° so their back is facing the opponent, extends their leg backwards which exploits the turning momentum to hit the opponent in wither the chest or stomach with the sole of their foot. There is also a jumping back kick where a wrestler does the turning motion when they jump.

A backflip kick or Pelé kick (named after the Brazilian Association football player) is a move where a wrestler has their back turned to the opponent, performs a standing backflip and hits their opponent in the head with either one or both of their legs. There is also a version called the Corner backflip kick where the opponent is in the corner and a wrestler charges at them, running the ropes beside the opponent (sometime up the opponent), reaches the top and kicks off the opponent's chest to do a backflip so the wrestler lands on their feet.

A big boot, Yakuza kick or Mafia kick is a move where when the opponent is charging at the wrestler, the wrestler lifts their leg up and uses the opponent's momentum to hit the wrestler's boot with their head or face. The move is usually done by taller wrestlers to further show its view as a strong attack although the wrestler is not moving and its the opponent that runs into their foot because of the wrestler's height making it easy for their leg to reach the head of a normal-sized opponent.

A bicycle kick is a move where the wrestler jumps up and kicks forward with both feet in a pedaling motion. The foot that gets lifted second extends fully and hits the charging opponent in the face. There is another version of the kick where the wrestler charges from a standing opponent and delivers the kick.

A calf kick is a move where the wrestler either one of their sides and connects the side of their rear leg to either the opponent's face or neck.

A crane kick is where a wrestler performs a crane stance, by standing on one of their legs, with their other knee raised and their arms extended in a crane position. They then strike either the opponent's head or face with either the standing or raised leg.

A dragon whip is a type of leg lariat or spinning heel kick where an opponent catches the wrestlers leg (after some attempt at a kick). The opponent throws the leg away from them self and the wrestler continues to spin all the way out with their leg still extended to hit a leg lariat.

A dropkick is a move where a wrestler jumps up and kicks the opponent with both the soles of their feet, the wrestler twists as they jump so that when the feet hit with the opponent, one of the feet is raised higher that the other. The wrestler then falls back to the mat on either their side or their front. The move is usually done by lighter wrestlers to gain an advantage with their agility.

An enzuigiri is any move that hits the opponent in the back of the head. The move is usually done by lighter wrestlers and wrestlers that have a martial arts background or gimmick. The move is usually used as a counter move after one of the wrestler's kick is blocked and caught by the opponent. One of the more common versions of the enzuigiri is when the wrestler steps up the opponent's chest and hits the back of their head with the other leg or foot. The name enzuigiri comes from "Enzui" (the Japanese word for medulla oblongata) and "giri" (meaning "to chop"). The name of the move is sometimes misspelled as 'ensuigiri' or 'enzuiguri'.

A football kick or soccer kick is a move where a wrestler kicks an opponent, that is sitting on the mat, vertically into their back, with their foot hitting the base of the opponent's spine, and the shin hitting the back of the head.

The jumping high kick or gamengiri is a move where the wrestler jumps up and kicks the opponent in either the face or the side of their head. It is often confused with the enzuigiri because of the similar nature of the move.

A legsweep is a move where a wrestler drops to one knee and extends their other leg, they then quickly pivot their body around and using their extended leg to knock away the opponent’s legs.

A mule kick is a move where a wrestler that is facing away from a charging opponent, bends down and pushes out one of their feet, hitting the opponent with the bottom of it. There is also another version called the double mule kick where a wrestler that is facing away from the opponent jumps and kicks backwards with both of their legs, hitting the opponent with both soles of their feet. The move is sometimes done in the corner. If the wrestler is acrobatically talented enough, they can roll forward into a standing position.

An overhead kick is a move where a wrestler starts by either lying down or dropping down on the mat while the opponent standing near their head. The wrestler then lifts one of their legs and kicks up over their waist and chest, hitting the opponent with the top of their foot, usually in the head. The move can be used as a counter attack to an attack from behind.

A punt kick is a move where a wrestler runs up to a kneeling opponent and hits them in the head with the sole of their foot. It is based on the field goal kick but is named after the punt kick from American football.

A rolling wheel kick, abisegiri, rolling koppou kick, or a rolling liger kick is a move where a wrestler rolls towards a standing opponent, and extends a leg which hits the opponent in either the back, chest, or head.

The most common type of savate kick is the "chassé", a piston-action kick, where the wrestler kicks the opponent so that the sole of their foot hits either their head or chin.

A scissors kick, jumping axe kick or butterfly kick is a type of leg drop where a wrestler bounces off the ropes, jumps, and drives their leg(s) into the back of the opponent's head and neck, similar to a pair of scissors. There is also a corkscrew version where the wrestler twists during the strike and faces the floor while performing the scissor kick.

A shoot kick is move where a wrestler hits the opponent in the face, chest or legs with their shin. It is a kickboxing-style kick. The shoot kick is used in many shoot-style environments and by many Japanese wrestlers.

A sole kick is a move where a wrestler turns their torso away from their opponent while lifting their leg horizontally and extending it forward at the same time. It then hits the opponent in the torso with the sole of the wrestler's foot. There is also a spin kick version where a wrestler spins around and performs the sole butt kick with their outer leg. It is known as the rolling sole butt in Japan. There is a jumping version as well where the wrestler jumps straight up, spins in midair and hit the sole butt with their outer leg, hitting the opponent's head.

A spin kick or reverse roundhouse kick is a high kick that gains power and momentum after the wrestler spins in place. The move is similar to the spinning heel kick but the wrestler does not jump off of the ground which makes it a leg lariat of some sorts. It is a common move after an opponent was Irish whipped off of the ropes. The move is known as La Filomena in Mexico.

A spinning heel kick is a move where a wrestler spins 360° as they jump so their body is somewhat horizontal, before they hit their opponent with back of either their leg(s) or heel(s) on either the face, neck or chest.

A stomp or foot stomp is a move where a wrestler stamps their foot on any part of a downed opponent. Another version of the foot stomp is where a wrestler performs a series of stomps all over the body of a downed opponent in the order of left arm, left chest, left stomach, left upper leg, left lower leg, right lower leg, right upper leg, right stomach, right chest, right arm, and finally the jaw. It has become known as the "Garvin Stomp" and it was created in the late 1980s by former NWA World Heavyweight Champion Ron Garvin. There is also a double foot stomp or double stomp version where a wrestler jumps and stamps both of their feet on any part of an opponent.

A superkick happens when a wrestler delivers a kick to the opponent's face or chin and is usually preceded by a sidestep. Shawn Michaels used a superkick known as the Sweet Chin Music as his finishing move during his in-ring career.

A tiger feint kick is a move where a wrestler jumps through both the second and top rope while they hold on to the ropes, and use the momentum to swing back around into the ring. The move was first performed as a fake dive to trick the opponents and fans into thinking that the wrestler was going to dive through the ropes to opponents outside the ring. The move is usually used by smaller wrestlers in Japan and Mexico. Rey Mysterio uses a tiger feint kick called the "619" as his finishing move.

A toe kick is a move where the wrestler hits the opponent in either the midsection or stomach with the point of their foot in order to bend the opponent over. The move is used by mostly all wrestlers and is used to setup a hold or throw.

In professional wrestling, a lariat is a move where a wrestler runs towards and wraps their arm around both the upper chest and neck of an opponent. The move forces the opponent to the ground. The move is similar to a clothesline but the difference between a lariat and a clothesline is that in a clothesline, the wrestler's arm is kept straight to the side of the wrestler while performing it and in the lariat, the wrestler hits their opponent with their arm. The lariat to the back of the neck and shoulders is sometimes called the northern lariat or enzui lariat. A lariat where a wrestler doesn't run but strikes the opponent while standing next to them is sometimes called a short range lariat or a burning lariat. The wrestler can hold the opponent's head up before performing the lariat with the other arm. A short-arm lariat is a version where the wrestler grabs one of the opponent's wrists with their hand and pulls the opponent closer, they then strike the opponent with the lariat with their other arm. Usually, a lariat is used as a finishing move and the clothesline as just a regular move. The main differences between the two moves are stiffness. The lariat is basically a very stiff clothesline that is used as a finisher rather than a regular move.

A crooked arm lariat is a move where a wrestler runs towards their opponent with the arm bent upward at the elbow 60–90 degrees and wraps their arm around the opponent's head which forces them to the ground.

A flying lariat is a move where a wrestler uses the ropes to build up speed, leaps forward and wrap their arm around the opponent's neck which causes the power of the force to knock the opponent down.

A lariat takedown, running neckbreaker, or bulldog lariat is a move where a wrestler runs towards their opponent, wraps their arm around the opponent's upper chest and neck, and the wrestler swings their legs forward, while using their momentum to pull the opponent down with them to the mat, on to their upper back.

A leg lariat, jumping leg lariat, or a running calf kick is a move where a wrestler runs at an opponent, jumps and wraps their leg around the opponent's head / neck knocking the opponent to the ground.

A leapfrog body guillotine is move where a wrestler running from behind towards an opponent resting on the second rope, jumps and lands on their opponent's back, neck and head, sliding through the ropes out of the ring and forcing the opponent against the second rope.

It is a close-fisted punch, that usually hits the opponent's body or face. Unlike most of the other illegal attack, the punch almost never result in disqualification. Instead, the referee warns the wrestler to stop but they usually don't.

The back fist is a version of the close-fisted punch where the wrestler hits their opponent with the back of their fist. There is also a spinning back fist version where the wrestler holds their arm out and does a back fist while turning their body with speed so that the back of their fist hits the opponent in either the head or chest on rotation.

A heart punch is a move where a wrestler either raises the opponent's left arm over their head or folds it behind their neck and delivers a strong punch into the side of the opponent's ribcage. The move is alleged to rely on "Oriental pressure points" to strike a nerve causing the opponent's heart to momentarily stop, rendering them unconscious.

One of the most common versions of mounted punches involves the wrestler standing on the middle or top ropes and delivering repeated punches to the face while the opponent is backed up against the turnbuckles. The punches usually go until ten with the crowd counting along unless the opponent pushes the wrestler off of the ropes. Another version of mounted punches is where a wrestler either does a standing double leg takedown or Lou Thesz press first, mounts the opponent's chest or back and starts punching them in the head area.

A wind-up punch is a move where a wrestler rotates their arm in a "winding-up" motion before they hit the opponent, making the punch seem more effective. The wind-up punch was commonly used by Hulk Hogan.

It is where a wrestler delivers an overpowering open-hand slap to their opponent.

A double slap is where a wrestler slaps both of the opponent's cheeks with both of their hands. It call also sometimes be referred to as a bell clap.

A palm strike or shotei is where a wrestler delivers an open-hand strike with the palm of their hand, usually to the opponent's chin.

A senton is similar to a big splash except the wrestler jumps over an opponent while falling backwards and landing back-first onto the opponent. The move is also referred to as either a senton splash or back splash in reference to the big splash as well as to difference itself from the diving version of the senton. Another variation of a standard senton is where a wrestler jumps forward and performs a somersault to land back-first onto the opponent. It is called the somersault senton, and is also referred to as a front flip senton/rolling senton.

A cannonball senton is a move where the wrestler performs a front flip senton onto an opponent sitting in a corner. When the opponent is sitting in the corner, the wrestler runs towards them flips forward 180° so that their back impacts on both the opponents chest and head which causes the opponent to be sandwiched between both the turnbuckle and the wrestler.

A seated senton, vertical splash or butt drop is a move where the wrestler jumps down into a sitting position across the fallen opponent's chest or stomach. The move is usually done one of two ways: either from a standing position over the opponent or from the middle rope with the opponent in the corner. Some larger wrestlers, like Rikishi and Earthquake used the seated senton as their finishers. It is also an used as a counter to the sunset flip.

A shoulder block is where a wrestler hits their opponent with their shoulder by usually ramming their shoulder, keeping their arm to their side and into either the opponent's shoulder or abdomen of an opponent that is running towards them. Often times, larger wrestlers will stand still and have the opponent run towards them to try and perform the move only to get knocked down. The move is often used to show the size and strength of the wrestler, with the larger wrestler challenging to run off the ropes and hit the move. It usually sees the opponent try and attempt to charge at the larger wrestler many times only for their attempts to either have no effect or the opponent to get knocked down themselves. A slight version of this is called the body block which is usually used by large wrestler and sees the opponent run a the larger wrestler and the wrestler just engulfing the charging opponent by swinging their arms around and forcing the opponent to impact the wrestler's entire body.

A chop block is a move where a wrestler does a shoulder block and targets the back of the opponent's knee. The wrestler comes from behind, drops down and connects their shoulder with the back of the opponent's knees. It's often used to weaken the leg for a submission hold.

A spear or shoulder block takedown is a move where a wrestler charges at the standing opponent and brings their body parallel to the ground so that it drives their shoulder into the opponent's midsection, which pulls on the opponent's legs, as in a double leg takedown, and forces them back-first into the mat. There is also a striking spear version where a wrestler charges towards a standing opponent and drives his shoulder into the opponent's midsection, which tackles the opponent and forces them down into the mat back-first. Instead of the regular spear, the wrestler does not pull on the opponent's legs, as in a double leg takedown, and relies on the momentum of the strike to force the opponent down. Goldberg and Edge used the spear as their finishing moves in WCW and WWE. Rhyno also uses a move similar to the spear called the Gore.

The turnbuckle thrust is move where the wrestler performs a shoulder block to an opponent that is set up on the turnbuckle. The opponent usually rests back-first against the turnbuckles and the wrestler places their shoulder against the opponent, swinging their legs back and forth to gain momentum for the wrestler driving their shoulder into the opponent's chest.

A standing moonsault is a type of moonsault that happens when a wrestler turns their back to a downed opponent, does a backflip and lands on their opponent chest-first.

A standing shooting press is a type of shooting star press that happens when a wrestler jumps forward and performs backflip, landing on the downed opponent's chest.

A stink face is where a wrestler rubs their buttocks in the face of an opponent that is lying in the corner of the ring. It is done to humiliate the opponent. Rikishi used it as one of his signature move.

A uppercut is a type of punch that is used in boxing. It is usually aimed at the opponent's chin. The uppercut is, along with the hook, one of the two main punches that count as power punches in the statistics. In boxing, the uppercut refers only to a punch, while in wrestling the other forms of uppercuts are used including an open-handed punch version.

A European uppercut is a forearm uppercut where a wrestler uses a quick grapple and brings their arm up inside to hit their opponent under the chin.

A knee lift is a move where a wrestler uses their knee and brings it up to hit the opponent under the chin. The move can either be used mid clinch or while the wrestler is charging at a kneeling or bent over opponent, lifting their knee upwards to strike underneath the opponent's jaw or the side of their head. There is also a double knee lift versions where a wrestler forces the opponent’s head down and quickly jumps, bending at the knees, and hitting the opponent in either the face or chest.

A throat thrust, throat strike, sword stab, or an open-hand uppercut is a move where a wrestler strikes at the opponent's throat with their open hand and usually with their palm facing upwards and with all five fingers together. The move is done like a normal uppercut. It can also be used with their opponent in a side headlock.

A weapon shot is where a wrestler takes a weapon and strikes their opponent with it. Common weapons in professional wrestling are folding chairs, guitars, folding tables, title belts, "kendo sticks", and trash cans. Using weapons as weapons are usually illegal except in matches with No Disqualifications.

A chair shot is where a wrestler hits their opponent with a chair. The strike with the chair is used with the flat face of the chair to slow the swing and deal out the impact, to prevent injury to the opponent.

A chair thrust or guillotine shot is where a wrestler placing the top of a chair either under the opponent's chin or by the Adam's Apple, and while holding the chair with one hand and the back of the opponent's head with another, the wrestler hits the mat with the legs of the folded chair while it is still placed under the opponent's chin and at the same time forcing the opponent's head down. This highly damages that part of the opponent.

A guitar shot or El Kabong (a reference to Quick Draw McGraw) is where a wrestler breaks a guitar over an opponent's head. Jeff Jarrett performed the move a lot during his career.

This attack has a wrestler lay their opponents head on a folding chair, they take another chair and hit their opponents head sandwiching the head in-between the two chairs.

Some of the moves that are done by wrestlers are not meant to pin an opponent, weaken them or force them to submit. Some of the moves are used to set up the opponent for another attack.

A discus is a move where a wrestler spins in place before they hit an attack, like the discus clothesline, discus punch, or the discus forearm. The move is usually used instead of charging towards an opponent to build up momentum for an attack, or using the discus spin to evade other attacks.

A handspring is a move where a wrestler runs towards the ropes and performs a handstand next to the opponent. The wrestler then uses the momentum to throw their legs against the ropes and uses the spring that is gained to throw themselves backwards and back onto their feet. They still us the momentum to leap backwards and usually to deliver an attack. The most common version is the back elbow strike. Another common version is a handspring transition which the wrestler Irish whips the opponent onto a turnbuckle from the opposite corner. The wrestler then does a handspring combination towards the opponent. The combination usually features a cartwheel followed by either one or two back-tucks which leaves the wrestler's back facing the opponent. The wrestler then uses the momentum of the handspring combo to leap backwards and hit their opponent either a back elbow, back thump, dropkick, or any other type of attack.

A pendulum is a move where a wrestler does a tilting sequence, similar to that of a pendulum, in between the ropes (usually near a ringpost) to gain momentum to perform either an attack or counterattack.

A rolling thunder is a move where a wrestler does a forward roll towards an opponent and uses the complete rotation to spring up onto their feet and into the air to perform an attack. The most popular version of the move ends with a jumping somersault senton. Rob Van Dam does a rolling thunder as one of his signature moves.

Illegal moves are moves that can result in a disqualification. Illegal moves are usually done by heel wrestlers. The moves are usually done when the referee is either downed or distracted.

Asian mist is the illegal move of spitting a colored liquid into an opponent's face in professional wrestling. After the wrestler does this, the opponent will (in storyline) be blinded and will experience intense stinging in their eyes. The Asian mist comes in almost any color, but the most common color that is used is green. On a rare occasion, a wrestler will use a flammable substance (like alcohol for example).

The different kinds of Asian mist are:

Biting is when a wrestler grabs their opponent and bites them with their teeth. The move is usually used as a desperation move when a wrestler is "trapped".

An eye poke or a thumb to the eye is when a wrestler pokes their thumb or finger(s) into the opponent's eye(s). The move is usually done by heel wrestlers to gain an advantage on their opponent.

An eye rake is where a wrestler moves his hand down an opponent's eye(s), to make it appear that the wrestler dragged their fingers across the opponent's eye(s). The move is usually done by heel wrestlers to gain an advantage on their opponent.

A fireball is when the wrestler (using a concealed lighter) lights a piece of flash paper and throws it in the opponent's face which gives the impression that a supernatural ball of fire emerged from their hand.

A hangman is a move where a wrestler on the other side of the ring ropes from an opponent, grabs the opponent by the head and drops down which forces their throat to land across the ropes. There is a common version where the wrestler perform a catapult to the opponent while the opponent is lying down in between both the bottom and second ropes. There is also a reverse hangman or "reverse" hotshot which is similar to the normal hangman but when the wrestler is standing outside either the ring or on the apron, they grab the back of either the opponent's head or neck.

A hair pull is when a wrestler pulls the opponent's long hair. It is usually used by female wrestlers. The wrestler is given a 5 count to let go or they will be disqualified.

A low blow happens when a wrestler either kicks or strikes the opponent in the groin. It can cause a disqualification and is usually used by heel wrestlers or valets.

A testicular claw is a clawhold where a wrestler grabs a hold of the opponent's testicles and squeezes. There is also version called Vaginal Claw which is rarely used in woman's wrestling.


