Survivor: Pearl Islands

Survivor: Pearl Islands (also known as "Survivor: Pearl Islands — Panama") was the seventh season of the American reality show "Survivor". It was filmed in 2003 and started being shown on TV on September 18, 2003.

The show takes place on the Pearl Islands, off the coast of Panama, and had a pirate theme. The two starting tribes were Drake (named for Sir Francis Drake) and Morgan (named for Henry Morgan). Later on, the two were merged (combined) into one tribe, which the players named "Balboa". The new tribe was named after an injured snake Rupert found and used as a mascot for the Drake tribe. 

Sandra Diaz-Twine won against Scout master Lillian "Lill" Morris in a 6-1 vote.

"Survivor: Pearl Islands" became available on DVD on February 7, 2006.

This season is the only season so far which has had two of its players returning in two other seasons. Rupert Boneham returned in "" and made 4th place, then Jon "Jonny Fairplay" Dalton played again in "", and was the first person voted out that season. While neither of them won any seasons, Boneham did win $1,000,000 in "". Sandra Diaz-Twine returned in "", along with Boneham, his third time on "Survivor". Their places are unknown because the season has not been shown on TV yet.

The start of the game was announced as a surprise to the players, who were told that they would be playing in the clothes on their backs, most thinking they were getting publicity shots before the game started, and that no more supplies would be given to them. The players were split into the two tribes, Morgan and Drake, and given their running shoes, a small bag of money and a map to a close village where they would could use the money to get what they thought they needed for survival as well as a boat trip to their beach, and were told to swim the rest of the way. Drake, thanks to Sandra being able to speak Spanish and Rupert's idea to steal the untouched shoes of Morgan and use them as exchanging goods, was able to get a lot of items, while Morgan did not plan as well. A twist for this season sent one player from the tribe winning reward to steal one item from the other tribe's camp. Morgan lost most of the early Reward and Immunity challenges, leaving them three players down and with less items to work with at camp. During this time, Osten, a member of Morgan, started to say that he wanted to quit the game.

With Drake looking like they were going to continue to win, Burton started a plan to purposely lose the fourth Immunity challenge to get rid of the tribe's weaker players such as Trish and Christa. Though Rupert and others thought this was a bad idea, they did it anyway, purposely allowing Morgan to win. In a twist, Jeff Probst said that Morgan won the right to "kidnap" one Drake member through the next Reward challenge, and Morgan quickly chose Rupert. As a result, Burton was voted out at Drake's first tribal council. The change in power lead to Morgan winning the next two Immunity challenges and leaving the tribes equal, five members on each tribe.

When they arrived at their next challenge, the tribes found out that there was another twist, as the six players they had voted off before returned to the game as an "outcast tribe". In the next challenge, the outcasts tribe won against Morgan and Drake; both would have to vote off a player at separate tribal councils, while the outcasts tribe would vote in two players to return to the game in their place. Osten quit the game at Morgan's tribal council. Host Jeff Probst wasn't happy when Osten quit. The outcasts tribe chose Lil and Burton to return to the game, both, by chance, returning to their starting tribes but having immunity at the next tribal council. While Burton made up with his old tribe, Lil's return didn't make the other Morgan members too happy.

The next day, the two tribes merged (combined) into one tribe which the players named "Balboa", a name given to a sea snake that Rupert had found and tried to nurse back to health but failed. The tribe moved to Drake's beach. Burton and Rupert won individual immunities, and, along with Lil's anger, helped to voted out old Morgan members Andrew and Ryan O. Now there were more old Drake members than old Morgan members. Jon and Burton started to see Rupert as a physical threat for challenges, and wanted to vote him off, bothering Rupert's alliance members Sandra and Christa. In the next reward challenge, where family and loved ones of the players were brought to the islands, Jon had planned weeks before with his best friend to play the story of a "dead grandmother", hoping to use it to gain sympathy. Though Sandra knew he was lying, Jon successfully convinced the other players, making them to give up the reward to Jon and then having to spend one night on Morgan's old beach while Jon and his friend hung out alone, celebrating the lie's success. Jon and Burton planned to vote off the rest of the women players, voting off Tijuana and Christine. With five players left, Burton won a car reward and took Jon with him away from camp. This allowed Sandra, Lil, and Darrah to make a plan to vote off Burton by having Sandra act like she was certainly the next one to go. Burton and Jon knew the woman were probably working against them, and to his surprise, Burton was voted off at the following tribal council, leaving Jon struggling to try to win back the women's' trust. The next immunity challenge had yet another twist, as though it was a trivia quiz, the jury played also. The jury won, so none of the players left had immunity. Darrah was voted off, leaving Jon, Lil, and Sandra as the final three.

During the last immunity challenge, Sandra fell out early, so Jon to try to convince Lil to take him to the final two. Lil said no, and won the immunity challenge. Lil struggled with her decision of who to take to the last tribal council, but chose Sandra. During the last tribal council, they jury said that Lil's behavior during the game was not what people expected of a scoutmaster, and they asked questions Lil could not easily answer. Sandra was voted the Sole Survivor on a vote of 6-1. In the reunion show, she found out that if she had taken Jon to the final two, she likely would have won.

 Lillian Morris and Burton Roberts were brought back into the game on Day 20, so they are both listed as having placed in two different points in the game. The tribes they were in for a short time upon their return were the same tribes they started in.
 There was no Reward Challenge and was not yet known to the castaways.

 Both tribes lost a challenge to the Outcast Tribe made of the first 6 players voted off; as a result, both tribes had to vote out a player.



