Cahors

Cahors () is a commune in southwestern France. Located in the region of Occitanie, it is the "prefecture" (capital) of the Lot department. It is also the capital of 3 "cantons": Cahors-1, Cahors-2 and Cahors-3.

Cahors was the capital of the old province of Quercy and the people of this city are known, in French, as "cadurciens" (women: "cadurciennes"); this name comes from the old name of the city, "Carduca".

Cahors is an ancient town. The people that inhabited the area at the time of the Roman conquest were called "Carduci" and so the Romans named the town as Divona or "Divona Cadurcorum", "Divona of the Cadurci"; Divona was a source of water, now called ""fontaine des Chartreux"". The word "Cahors" comes from "Cadurcorum".

Cahors is located in the southwest of France, in the old province of Quercy, in the valley of the Lot river, and is found in a peninsula () formed by an U-shaped meander of that river which gives its name to the department.

It has an area of and its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is .

The "commune" is at north of Toulouse and is surrounded by the "communes" Mercuès, Calamane, Pradines, Arcambal, Lamagdelaine, Laroque-des-Arcs, Trespoux-Rassiels, Labastide-Marnhac, Le Montat and Flaujac-Poujols.

The climate of Cahors, in the Köppen climate classification, is Cfb - Oceanic climate with template summers.

With a population of 19,630, Cahors has a population density of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Cahors

Cahors forms, together with the "commune" Pradines, the urban area of Cahors, with a population of 23,090 inhabitants (2013) and an area of . This urban area is the centre of the metropolitan area of Cahors, formed by 44 "communes" with a population of 44,255 inhabitants (2013) and an area of .

Cahors is the prefecture of the Lot department, the capital of the "arrondissement" of Cahors and the administrative centre () of the Cahors-1, Cahors-2 and Cahors-3 cantons.

It is part of the intercommunality "Le Grand Cahors" ().

Some places of interest are:




