Judith Rich Harris

Judith Rich Harris (born February 10, 1938) researches psychology. She is an independent researcher, and not a university professor. Her most famous book is "The Nurture Assumption". The book asks "Why [do] children turn out the way they do"? Its answer is that "Parents matter less than you think and peers matter more".

Harris graduated from Tucson High School and attended the University of Arizona and Brandeis University, from where she graduated magna cum laude in 1959. In 1961 she received a master's degree in psychology from Harvard University.

She married Charles S. Harris in 1961; they have two daughters (one adopted) and four grandchildren.

Harris suffers from an autoimmune disease.

Harris's most famous work is "The Nurture Assumption". It was published in 1998. A revised version was published in 2009. Children often act like their parents act. Some psychologists thought this was because of the way that parents raised their children. Harris argues that (some or all of) this similarity is due to genetics. Otherwise, parents are not the most important factor in child development. This book argues that peers are more important. Harris argues that children are socialized by peers. 

Harris also wrote "No Two Alike: Human Nature and Human Individuality". It was published in February 2006. Harris attempts to explain why people are so different in personality, even identical twins who grow up in the same home.

George A. Miller was chair of the Department of Psychology which formally dismissed Harris from the PhD program at Harvard, 1960, on the grounds that her 'originality and independence' did not live up to Harvard's standards.

Later, in 1994, she developed a theory of child development, which focussed on the peer group rather than the family. This formed the basis for a 1995 article in the "Psychological Review" for which she received the American Psychological Association's George A. Miller Award for an Outstanding Recent Article in General Psychology.





