Transwoman

A transwoman (sometimes spelled as trans-woman or trans woman) is a male-to-female (MTF) transsexual or transgender person. Many people in this group like the name "trans woman" over the many medical terms that are out there. Other non-medical names are t-girl, tg-girl and ts-girl. Transgender, though, is the more common name.

Some people who are assigned male at birth feel that this is not who they really are. They feel that the gender they were assigned and the gender they actually are do not match. They may want to show their true gender as a woman. Because of this, many trans women want to simply be called "women", as they feel that being called a "trans" woman may mean that their new identity is false or not true. 

"Transitioning" refers to the act of changing a person's social and personal gender identity to the gender identity that they feel is their real self, and may or may not include having medical treatments done, or surgery, and the changing of their legal papers to show their new identity (such as their birth certificate) and changing the way that they dress.

Like trans men, trans women have many choices that they can make, depending on what culture they are in and what gender roles they, and the people who support them feel like they should have. No case is the same, and the options that are there for trans women depend very much on if they have easy access to medical care and money. Some trans women choose to have hair removed on their face, armpits and other parts of their body as well as train their voice so that it sounds more like a woman. There are surgeries that can make trans women's faces look more female, but may not always be necessary, as some trans women have faces that do not look very male. They are mainly to provide emotional benefits to patients so that they can see themselves changing or as a step in sexual reassignment surgery.

Some trans women who feel that their gender change is done, meaning that they have all the same physical characteristics of women who were assigned female at birth, want to just be called "women". They think that the names "transwoman" or "male-to-female" should only be used for people who have not finished their change. Some others do not feel that their gender ever changed and that they were always girls who were forced to live as boys. Because of this many see it as important to include a space in the name, as in "trans woman", using "trans" as a word to talk about a particular type of woman, not a "third gender" as "transwoman" might imply.

The story of the young boy who is very much like a young girl and grows up to live life as a woman has a very long history. It is a commonly, but wrongly, thought that all transgender and transsexual women are "straight" (attracted to males). Many studies on this issue have been thought to be hurt by bias, since many transsexuals feel they must give the "right" answers to such questions to help their chances of being able to get hormone therapy. 35% of trans women are lesbians.

Some do not pay attention to trans women identifying as women and continue to view them as men, calling trans women who feel attracted to men "homosexual" and trans women that are attracted to women as "nonhomosexual". This is seen as rude to the women that they are supposed to be studying.

Studies have shown that trans women are more likely to have a decreased sex drive (34%) than those who are born female (23%), but the difference was not very significant.



