Casineria

Casineria was a tetrapod which lived 340 million years ago (mya) in the Mississippian. It was a small animal, length about 15 centimeters. 

It lived in what was then a fairly dry environment in what is now Scotland. It had a mosaic of 'basal' (= primitive) amphibian and 'derived' (= advanced) amniote characters. 

"Casineria" was at or very near the origin of the amniotes. It may have been one of the very first true amniotes. The only fossil lacks key elements: most of the skull and the whole lower body is missing. This makes exact analysis is difficult.

"Casineria" was an insectivore. This earliest amniote had five fingers with claws on each hand, and marks the earliest known clawed foot. 

Its name, "Casineria", is a latin version of "Cheese Bay", the site near Edinburgh, where it was found.

In 1992, an amateur fossil collector spotted the remains of this four-legged creature on the shore of Cheese Bay, Scotland. For the next five years, the fossil waited at the National Museums of Scotland in Edinburgh while researchers focused on other projects. In 1997, work began to expose the remainder of the fossil from the surrounding matrix of stone. 

The work revealed that the animal probably lived in an environment much drier than previously understood. The findings were first reported in 1999.

"Casineria" shows features that ties it in with early tetrapods, notably a generally gracile (slim) build with light leg-bones, unfused ankles and toes ending in claws. This would enable the animal to use their feet actively in traction, rather than as holdfasts, and indication of a primarily terrestrial lifestyle. These traits shows it was closely related to amniotes.

With its advanced features, "Casineria" may have been one of the very first true amniotes, that is, egg-layers before the split between Synapsids and Sauropsids. "Casineria" pushes back the origin of amniote lineages much farther than was previously realized.

"Casineria" and its relatives were perhaps the first vertebrates to live and reproduce on land.


