Tarafa Baghajati

Tarafa Baghajati (, (born September 1st 1961) in Damascus, Syria) is a human right activist and writer,he is also the chairman of the Austrian Muslim Initiative (AMI).
He lives in vienna,Austria since 1986.

Tarafa Baghajati was born in , to parents Adnan Baghajati,an author and former Syrian Education minster,and Amal Homsi,an economic journalist.

In 1984 the Syrian regime detained Baghajati for more than 8 months,he spent three of them in due to his political views.

Since he moved to Austria in 1986,Baghajati is active on the topics of immigration, anti-racism , human right and political issues which also involve especially his home country , he is also very active on the topics of and "Muslim in and Europe", and opposition what is known as , and the practice of female genital mutilation (FGM), in Africa and Europe.

In 1999, he found the initiative of Muslim Austrians ( IMOE ) with his wife , Omar Al-Rawi , Mouddar Khouja and Andrea Saleh, who are members of the Islamic Religion Community in Austria .

Baghajati is a former board member . (2001 - 2007 , 2004-2007 Vice- President ) and member of the Honorary Advisory Board of (ENAR)
He is also a board member of the Platform for Intercultural Europe (PIE).

On March 2009, and Tarafa Baghajati met Sheikh Prof.Dr in Qatar, one of the most best known Islamic contemporary authority scholar. They obtained a issued by the recognized legal scholars, stating the genital mutilation of girls is referred to and forbidden as "devil's work" because it is directed against the ethics of Islam. Speaking at the Hamburg Museum of Ethnology, 6 February 2011 Baghajati ventured to predict to celebrate the end of this practice as early as 2020.

on February 2011,Rüdiger Nehberg and Tarafa Baghajati met this time Sheikh Prof.Dr and obtained a similar fatwa against female genital mutilation.

Baghajati is one of the finders and a board member of European Muslim Initiative for Social Cohesion (EMISCO).

Baghajati graduated as civil engineer from in 1986

Initiative of Muslim Austrians (IMOE) won democracy award by in 2008.

He is married to since 1990,has four children.


