Kápolnásnyék

Kápolnásnyék is a village in Fejér county, Hungary.

The excavations in the surroundings revealed Bronze-Age artefacts, proving that the area was already populated in ancient times.

The name of the settlement originates from the name of the Nyék tribe (coming to Hungary during the settlement of Hungarian tribes). The first residents probably belonged to a subgroup of the tribe. When István I. defeated Koppány, Nyék became a land of the queen. The name of the settlement is mentioned first in 1193 as Neck. Later the names Kápolnás Nyék, Káposztás Nyék, and Fertőfő Nyék are used to mention this rather insignificant place located between Buda and Fehérvár, which is south of the commercial route. As a border village Kápolnásnyék suffered from double taxation during the Turkish occupation (both Hungary and the Turkish Empire collected taxes). Therefore the population of the village decreased considerably and it even became uninhabited during the Turkish campaign of 1543. The inhabitants returned to the village in 1772. 

During the 19 century Upper and Lower Nyék were differentiated, even after 1861, when the Southem Railway was built. It is mentioned as an independent village first in 1871, to which Pettend was attached in 1898. Mihály Vörösmarty was born here.

The present appearance of the village was formed in the 1930s, when it became a commercial and service background for the booming tourism of Lake Velencei. The phone system, the gendarme patrol, local medical care, the railway station and the mill were established in this period. The settlement suffered serious injuries in World War II, when the majority of the population also died. The village was also behind in development, compared to other settlements of the region and became a part of Velence by the 1970s.
Kápolnásnyék declared its independence in 1990 and has gone though considerable development since then. It once again became the background for the tourism of Lake Velencei, where commercial service facilities are established and the infrastructure is developing rapidly.



