Harry Potter

Harry Potter is a series of seven fantasy novels by J. K. Rowling, a British author. It is named for its protagonist and hero, the fictional Harry Potter.

The seven books in the series have sold over 500 million copies across the world in over 70 languages, and is the best-selling book series of all time. All of them have been made into a series of eight feature films (there were two films for the last book) by Warner Bros. which is among the world's highest-grossing film series. There have been many other spin-off products that come from Harry Potter as well, turning Harry Potter into one of the world's most popular media franchises.

Harry Potter is a boy who was born from two loving parents, Lily and James Potter. Harry, like his parents, is a wizard. When Harry was one year old, his parents were killed by a dark (evil) wizard named Lord Voldemort. Voldemort had heard a prophecy that his greatest enemy would be a boy who sounded like Harry. It is later revealed that the prophecy also could have been Neville Longbottom. Voldemort fails to kill Harry and disappears. After the deaths of his parents, he was raised by his non-magical aunt (muggle), uncle, and cousin and they didn't treat him well. As a child, he did not know he was a wizard. He eventually discovers that there are many magical people, living secretly and hiding from non-wizards (known as "Muggles"). When Harry turned eleven, he received a letter inviting him to go to a boarding school called Hogwarts for young witches and wizards. Each book tells the story of one year of his life at the school. At school, he meets Ron and Hermione, his two best friends, along with many other characters. Voldemort tries several times to return, before finally succeeding in the fourth book. The series revolves around Harry trying to defeat Voldemort for good.

There are seven books. A series of eight movies based on the novels has been made by Warner Bros. They started making the movies in 2001. The first one was released on November 16th 2001. The second, third, fourth, and fifth were released respectively on 2002, 2004, 2006 and 2007. The sixth movie, Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince, was released on July 7, 2009. The final movie was divided into two parts. The first part, "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 1", was released in late November, 2010. Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 2 was released in July, 2011. Watch Harry Potter in 99 Seconds.



"Harry Potter and the Cursed Child, Parts I & II," is a new play based on a new story by J.K Rowling, Jack Thorne, and John Tiffany. It is billed as being the "eighth story, nineteen years later." It stars Jamie Parker as Harry, Noma Dumezweni as Hermione, and Paul Thornley as Ron.

The play officially opens July 30, 2016 at the Palace Theatre in London.






