Professional wrestling match types

Punjabi Prison Match

A singles match is a match between two wrestlers. The first person to either win by pinfall or submission is the winner. If one of the wrestlers get disqualified, or "counted out" (when a wrestler is caught outside of the ring and the referee counts to either 10 or 20, depending on the companies' rules) they will lose the match.

There are also different types of singles matches such as:

An Empty arena match is a hardcore match which takes place in an arena that has no fans in it. The only people that are there are the wrestlers, referee, and cameramen. One of the first known empty arenas matches took place in 1981 at the Mid South Coliseum in Memphis, Tennessee between Terry Funk and Jerry Lawler. Another well known empty arena match happened between The Rock and Mankind and was shown during the halftime show of Super Bowl XXXIII.

A Falls Count Anywhere match is a match where a pinfall or submission can happen anywhere in the arena. Weapons are usually legal. The types of matches often go in to the audience, the hallways and backstage areas.

A Flag match is a match where two flags are placed on opposite turnbuckles. To win the match, the wrestler must grab the opponent's flag and raise it while defending the flag in the their own corner. 

A Handicap match is a match where one wrestler or a team compete against a team of wrestlers with a higher number (for example; two against one, three against two, etc.) Usually it is the babyfaces wrestlers that are outnumbered by the heel wrestlers. Sometimes in two-on-one Handicap matches, the team acts under tag team rules.

An Iron Man match is a match where there is a set time limit and is also a multiple-fall match. The way to win the match is to have the most points by the end of the time limit. To gain a point, the wrestler must pin or submit their opponent. A point can also be gained by countout or disqualification.

A Lumberjack match is a regular match where the outside of the ring is surrounded by wrestlers. The wrestlers that surround the ring are called "lumberjacks" (females wrestlers are sometimes called "lumberjills"). If a wrestler is knocked out of the ring, the lumberjacks will put them back in. They are usually split in groups of faces and heels. During early lumberjack match, the lumberjacks would wear stereotypical lumberjack clothing but this is no longer done.

A bra and panties match is a match where the female wrestler must strip her opponent to her bra and panties to win.

A tuxedo match is a match where two male wrestlers compete in tuxedos. To win the match, the wrestler must strip their opponent's tuxedo off.

An evening gown match is a match where the wrestler must strip off the evening gown of her opponent to win.

A Tag Team match is a match between four wrestlers divided in to teams of 2. One wrestler of each team stands just outside the ring ropes until he is tagged in by his partner by slapping hands or lightly slapping their partners back with the ref watching. This match is won by pinfall or submission.

A Triple Threat match is regular match but with three competitors instead of two. First person to score a pinfall or submission wins. No disqualification or count outs. 

This match includes four wrestlers competing against each other at once. The match continues as the wrestlers are eliminated one by one by pinfall or submission until there is only one left which is then the winner.

A barbed wire steel cage match is a type of cage match where barbed wire is a part of the match's design. There are different variations of the match like a Razor wire Steel Cage Match which is the same except that razorwire replaces the barbed wire and it would wrap around the top, corners, and walls of the cage and Barbed wire Razor wire Steel Cage match is the same as the barbed wire cage match, however the top, corners, and walls of the cage are covered with barbed wire, further wrapped with razor wire.

A Fans Bring the Weapons match is a match where the weapons are given by the fans before the show. Sometimes the weapons will already be in the ring but usually they are handed to the wrestlers during the match. This type of match was popular in Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW).

A First Blood match is a match where there are no disqualifications. To win the match, a wrestler must make their opponent bleed.

A Last Man Standing match is a match where a wrestler has to hurt their opponent enough to where he cannot make it to his feet before the count of 10, the one who cannot meet the count loses. There are no pinfalls or submission, no disqualifications, no count outs.

A No Disqualification match is a match where the wrestlers cannot be disqualified and can use weapons and outside interference. Unlike the regular hardcore match, the pinfalls/submissions must be made in the ring.There are also no "Count Outs"

A Taipei Deathmatch is a match where the fists of the wrestlers are taped. The wrestlers then dip their fists in super glue and broken glass. The way to win the match is by either Pinfall, Submission or Escape.

A Kiss My Foot match is a type of singles match where the loser has to kiss the winner's foot. Known matches include Bret Hart vs Jerry Lawler at the King of the Ring and Jerry Lawler vs Michael Cole at Over the Limit. There is a similar version of the match is the "Kiss My Ass Match", where the loser had to kiss the winner's butt and was held during WWF's Attitude Era.

Luchas de Apuestas (gambling fights) are matches where both of the wrestlers put something on the line, usually their mask or hair. The loser of the match would then lose the thing that they put on the line. A masked wrestler would be forced to unmask and a wrestler that put their hair on the line would be shaven bald. This type of match is popular in Mexico. 

A Boiler Room Brawl is a match where two wrestlers fight in a boiler room. To win the match, the wrestler must escape the boiler room. 

A Parking Lot Brawl is a match where two wrestlers fight in a parking lot. The wrestlers are allowed to use everything around them including the cars as weapons. The wrestler must win by either pinfall or submission. A similar match called the Iron Circle match takes place in a in the middle of many cars parked in a circle with their headlights on.

A Pig Pen Match is match where two wrestlers fight in a pig pen full of pigs that is placed near the stage. The match ends when the wrestler pins, submits or throws their opponent into the pig pen.

A Ladder match is a match where a prize is hung above the ring, usually a championship belt or a briefcase with a contract inside. To win you must climb a ladder and retrieve the prize. Weapons are legal in this match type.

A tables, ladders and chairs match (usually abbreviated to TLC) is a match where tables, ladders and steel chairs can be used as weapons. The first TLC match took place at SummerSlam in 2000 between Edge and Christian, The Dudley Boyz and The Hardy Boyz.

A Tables match is a match where a wrestler must put their opponent through a table with an offensive move in order to win. The match can also be used in tag teams, under an elimination match and during a one "fall" rules match. There is also a hardcore version where the wrestler must put the opponent through a table that has been set on fire.

A steel cage match is a match that literally takes place in a steel cage which surrounds the ring. You can win by pinfall, submission or escaping the cage by climbing over with both feet hitting the floor outside or by exiting the door with both feet hitting the floor.

A Hell in a Cell match is a match which takes place in a large cage which covers beyond the ring apron is lowered around the ring and leaves a small gap between the edge of the ring and the cage wall. It also covers the top of the cage hence the name 'cell'. There is no disqualification and wrestlers are allowed to go outside the cell. 

During the early Hell in a Cell matches, many wrestlers got injured. A famous moment happened in 1998 at King of the Ring when The Undertaker threw Mankind off the 16-foot (5 m) high cell through the Spanish announcers table. Undertaker also chokeslammed Mankind through the roof of the cell onto a thumbtack-covered mat in the same match. 

An Elimination Chamber match is a match which takes place in a large, circular steel cage that surrounds the entire ring. The chamber contains four clear, plexiglass pods which holds four of the six wrestlers in the match. A pod opens every five minutes to let another wrestler into the match. A wrestler can be eliminated from the match by either pinfall or submission. The wrestler that either gets a pinfall or submission of the last two remaining competitors is the winner. The match was created by Triple H and was introduced by Eric Bischoff in November 2002.

An Inferno match is a type of match where the ring is completely surrounded by flames when both of the wrestler have entered the ring. The way to win the match is for a wrestler to set their opponent on fire. The match usually ends on the outside so that the paramedics can help the loser of the match. The first inferno match took place at in 1998 where The Undertaker defeated Kane.

A Buried alive match is a match where there is a grave dug out of dirt found outside the ring. The way to win the match is for a wrestler to throw their opponent into the grave and bury them in dirt. There are usually shovels, wheelbarrows or bulldozers to help with the burying.

A casket match, also known as a Coffin match, is a match where there is a casket near the ring. To win the match, the wrestler has to throw their opponent in the casket and close the lid. 


