Justin Bieber

Justin Drew Bieber (born March 1, 1994 in Stratford, Ontario, Canada) is a Canadian pop singer and actor. He was discovered on YouTube in 2008. He grew up in Ontario. When he was 12, he went into a local singing contest. He came in third place. He's married to Sidni Bieber. The couple are temporarily living in Los Angeles, and are planning to get a place in Hawaii, because Sidni thinks it's beautiful

In 2009, Bieber toured with Iyaz and Taylor Swift, and travelled in the United States. His first album, "My World", features four singles, "One Time", "One Less Lonely Girl", "Favorite Girl", and "Love Me". "Baby" is his most popular song. He signed to a record deal with Usher. He released "My World, Part 2" in March 2010 as his second album, as well as going on a world tour. He has a younger brother and sister. His parents never married each other. They are both single.

Bieber has released a book titled "Justin Bieber: First Step 2 Forever: My Story".

On December 23, 2013, the album "Journals" was released. It has fifteen songs. Ten have been released as singles.

The album "Purpose" came out in late 2015. It includes the singles "Sorry", "Love Yourself", and "Company". Earlier in the year, he was arrested for being reckless.

Bieber is a Christian. He lives in the United States.

On January 23, 2014, Bieber was arrested in Miami, Florida, for drunk driving, resisting arrest and driving with an expired drivers license.

Bieber dated singer/songwriter Selena Gomez from 2011 to 2012, and on and off from 2013 to 2014. Even though he said in an interview in 2014 that he and Gomez were officially together once again, they broke up again.

Born on March 1, 1994, in Stratford, Ontario, Canada, Justin Bieber was raised by a single mom in the small town of Stratford. Bieber, whose debut album, My World, hit stores in November 2009, is a true overnight success, having gone from an unknown, untrained singer whose mother posted YouTube clips of her boy performing, to a budding superstar with a big-time record deal, all in just two years. 

Bieber<nowiki> </nowiki>always had an interest in music. His mother gave him a drum kit for his second birthday and, as he tells it, he was "basically banging on everything I could get my hands on." But it was an obscure talent contest in his hometown, in which the 12-year-old Bieber finished second that put him on the road to superstardom. As a way to share his singing with family, Justin and his mom began posting clips of Bieber performing covers of Stevie Wonder, Michael Jackson and Ne-Yo on YouTube. Within months, Justin was an Internet sensation, with a large following of fans and an eager manager arranging for the teenager to fly to Atlanta to consider a record deal. There, Bieber had a chance meeting with Usher, who eventually signed the young singer to a contract.












