Roblox

Roblox (stylized as ROBLOX) is a website and virtual sandbox where players make their own massively multiplayer online games for other players to play. Roblox was founded in 2004 as "Dynablocks". Roblox publishes the players' games using the programming language called Lua. Players make their games using a simpler version of this program. As of now, Roblox has been removed from the TrustE program. It is listed in the Better Business Bureau with a poor rating.

Roblox was originally called Dynablocks. Dynablocks was worked on from 2004 to 2005, but in 2004, only the developers and very few players could make its games. Dynablocks had two features: Build Mode and Challenge Mode. In May 2005, Dynablocks was renamed to its current name "Roblox". Also, new features were added, including logging in and logging out, building more complex things, and special Roblox points. During this time, Roblox was only available in beta to certain players.

Roblox had another big change in 2006. In January 2006, Roblox removed their special points and made the multiplayer API, but the API was never used until March 2006. In February of 2006, Roblox left beta and was made available to all players. In September 2006, Roblox made changes to the multiplayer API so that players could make their own multiplayer games for free instead of the developers making them. 

In May 2007, the Roblox developers began making virtual items, and its first virtual item was a top hat. Roblox also started the Builders Club which is a paid membership.

Guest mode, which is for players that want to play Roblox without making an account, was introduced in 2008. Later, higher forms of the Builders Club (known as the Turbo Builders Club and the Outrageous Builders Club) were started in 2009.

In 2010, the Roblox Studio was changed so that game developers could understand its functions easily. Then, in June 2015, Roblox released Smooth Terrain which made the terrain (such as sand, grass, water, etc.) more realistic.

Roblox lets its players create their own games using its special program called Roblox Studio. Players on Roblox can build anything they please using the Studio and then publish their game to the Roblox website for everyone to play. If the player knows how to script, they can use it to change the game and make it perform in many different ways.

In some games, the creator may create game passes which will cost a certain amount of Robux (the virtual currency). The game pass is not needed to play the game, but if they buy it, they are usually given special benefits.

Players on Roblox can buy virtual items from the Catalog using virtual currency. This currency is obtained by selling items on Roblox, or by logging in daily if a player has a Builders Club. There is only one currency called Robux (R$), which can only be obtained by purchasing Builders Club (a membership), buying a Robux card from certain shops, or using a credit card or PayPal on the Roblox website. Robux is used to buy items such as Gear (tools to use in-game such as swords and musical instruments) and Hats. In the Character page, players can change their clothing and customize their character as they please. All the virtual items that a player bought from the catalog appear here. Roblox sometimes gives away free hats during special events.

Another form of currency that was discontinued were the Tickets (Tix). All players could get a few Tickets each day they log into Roblox, and trade those tickets to get Robux. The Tickets were removed from the game in March 2016.

Builders Club is Roblox's membership club which can only be joined through a purchase. Builders Club gives its members more features in Roblox, such as earning more of its currency called Robux. There are three types of Builders Club: Classic, Turbo, and Outrageous. Classic is the original Builders Club type and Outrageous is the newest.

The Roblox Wiki is where new players can learn to play, build and script on Roblox. There are many tutorials and references that people will find really helpful. The following is a list of recommended links from the wiki:



