Mia Wasikowska

Mia Wasikowska (born October 14, 1989) is an Australian movie, television, and voice actress who is mostly known for her role as Alice in Tim Burton's "Alice in Wonderland". She is also known for her television role as Sophie in "In Treatment".
Wasikowska was born and raised in Canberra, Australia. She has an older sister named Jess, and a younger brother named Kai. Her mother, Marzena Wasikowska, is a photographer from Poland while her father, John Reid, is an Australian painter-and-collagist. As a child, she frequently accompanied her parents on their gallery rounds in Europe, and in her spare time, she continues to enjoy photography. She studied ballet as a child and turned to acting when she was 15. 
After some television and movie works in Australia, Wasikowska moved to Los Angeles to be in the cable drama "In Treatment". Her portrayal of a suicidal teen earned critical praise and led to more work in American movies, including "Defiance" and "Amelia". In Tim Burton's Alice, Wasikowska co-starred with Johnny Depp, Anne Hathaway, Helena Bonham Carter and carried a blockbuster movie, appearing in almost every scene. She won an AFI International Award, a Teen Choice Award and nominated an Empire Award for her performance. In 2009, it was announced that Wasikowska was cast in the Lisa Cholodenko-directed indie comedy film "The Kids Are All Right" alongside Annette Bening, Julianne Moore, Josh Hutcherson and Mark Ruffalo. Film received positive reviews from critics, and Wasikowska received Hollywood Film Festival Breakthrough Actress Award for her role. From March to May 2010, Wasikowska filmed Cary Fukunaga's adaptation of Jane Eyre, in which she starred as the title character opposite Michael Fassbender as Mr. Rochester. In 2011, Wasikowska shot the small supporting role of Shia LaBeouf's character's love interest in John Hillcoat's "Lawless". Then she filmed the lead in Park Chan-wook's English-language debut movie, "Stoker", alongside Nicole Kidman and Matthew Goode. In 2014, she starred in David Cronenberg movie titled "Maps to the Stars" with Julianne Moore, John Cusack, Robert Pattinson, Olivia Williams, and Sarah Gadon which premiered in competition for the Palme d'Or at the 2014 Cannes Film Festival.

In November 2013, it was announced that Wasikowska was cast in "Alice Through the Looking Glass", the 2016 sequel to "Alice in Wonderland".

Wasikowska lives in Bronte, New South Wales. In 2013, she began dating her "The Double" co-star Jesse Eisenberg. The two split in 2015.



