Touch (TV series)

Touch is an American supernatural drama television series, written and created by Tim Kring for the Fox Broadcasting Company. It was first aired on Wednesday, January 25, 2012 as a preview and on Thursday, March 22, 2012 as a series. 13 episodes have been ordered for the first season by Fox. The series was scheduled to begin on Monday, March 19, 2012, but was moved to Thursday, March 22, 2012, and on Thursday, March 15, 2012, a rerun of the first episode was broadcast. The show has a TV-PG and a TV-14 age rating in the United States. In Canada, the show is broadcast on the Global Television Network, and premiered on the same day at the same time as the U.S. broadcast. The show is produced by 20th Century Fox Television and Chernin Entertainment. In the United States, the second season began airing on Fridays at 9:00 p.m.

The newspaper reporter Martin Bohm was once successful, to his wife in the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001 in one of the towers of the World Trade Center was killed. Since then his life is no longer the same. Its mission is to since, about his autistic son to take care of Jake. Martin fails not only from communicating with his son, but can not cope with his behavioral problems. Soon the youth protection authority is turned on. Clea Hopkins believes that it would be best if Jake would come into a home. Martin sees it differently, because he noticed that his son is three times cut off at the same time from school to access a transmitting tower to climb. May be it soon becomes clear that Jake can predict the future. He gets information and support from Arthur DeWitt, a specialist in children with unusual talents.

On January 19, 2011, Fox announced that there was going to be a new pilot by Tim Kring. On January 26, 2011, Fox announced that the new pilot was going to air in the 2011–2012 television season.

On February 22, 2011, Fox said that Kiefer Sutherland would be the main actor in the show. On June 10, 2011, Danny Glover got a part in the series. On June 16, 2011, Gugu Mbatha-Raw got a part in the show. In July 2011, Titus Welliver got a part in the new show as a social worker.

The characters are created by Tim Kring.



The show mainly has positive reviews with PopMatters said the show was "stunningly effective" and praised "its mix of spirituality and science, familial and global struggles." They also noted that "The boy’s narration, unnervingly matter-of-fact about the nature of the universe, takes on more power when he reveals that in 11 years, he has never spoken a word."

The New York Post said "If you can’t get enough of number sequences and universal cylindrical patterns that constantly repeat, then for sure you’ll repeat the pattern of watching Fox’s new show...It is intriguing, and it’s great to have Sutherland back on TV" but felt "frankly, it’s awfully complicated."

The Chicago Sun Times said the show "operates on the mind-blowing premise that people around the world are linked to one another and their lives intersect — with potentially major repercussions." They finished the review saying it "delivers a suspenseful ride around the world, peppered with some tear-jerking moments. The bar has been set high. Here’s hoping “Touch” continues to reach it."

Kiefer Sutherland's performance has good reviews, with many critics saying "He plays the part with such a combination of intensity and subtlety that we are drawn deep into Martin’s suffering, and rather than judging him, we feel with him. Every trial is etched in his face. He imbued Jack Bauer with similar stoicism, but Martin seems less resilient, more distressed."

The Los Angeles Times gave the show a 40 of 100, which was the lowest review along with Philadelphia Daily News which was also 40 of 100.

On Metacrtic, the Metascore is 63 of 100 based on 27 critic reviews. The average score for users is 8.2 of 10.

The show has a 8.9 out of 10 ("great") score on TV.com.

The show has, for the first time in history, was one of the highest-rated individual channel airing of the season, ranking #1 or #2 in its time period and outperforming the primetime average of the broadcaster by double- or triple-digit percentage increases.

In Italy, it started as the channel's second highest-rated television premiere ever. In Spain, "Touch" ranked #1 for the first episode in the timeslot. In Latin American countries, outperformed the channels' primetime average by double- and triple-digit percentage increases in Argentina, Colombia and Mexico. Other countries had good starts, like Germany, Norway and Russia.

The show has started in over 100 countries including:
Most recent episodes can be viewed on Fox.com in the United States, it can also be viewed on many other sites. In Canada, recently aired full episodes air on Global Video at GlobalTV.com.




