Selena singles discography

This is the singles discography page of American singer Selena. This list has her 93 singles, two EPs and eight duets she had made in her music career. Selena was named the "top Latin artist of the '90s" as well as the "Best selling Latin artist of the decade" by "Billboard". Mostly because of her fourteen top-ten singles in the Top Latin Songs chart, including seven number-one hits. To date, Selena has sold over 5,000,000 singles worldwide.

"Contigo Quiero Estar" () was the lead single from "Selena" (1989). The song peaked at number eight on the US Hot Latin Tracks. "Baila Esta Cumbia" () was the lead single from "Ven Conmigo" (1990). The song peaked at number 20 on the Hot Latin Tracks. The song "Buenos Amigos" () was a duet with Salvadoran singer Alvaro Torres. The song peaked at number-one on the Hot Latin Tracks. It became Selena's and Torres' first number-one single. The song was a non-album single for Selena because it was not included in any of Selena's albums when she was alive. "La Carcacha" () became the lead single off of "Entre A Mi Mundo" (1992). The song peaked at number seven on the Latin Regional Mexican Airplay chart. "Como La Flor" () became one of Selena's signature songs. The song peaked at number-one on the Hot Latin Tracks. It became Selena's first song to peak at number-one as a solo artist. "¿Qué Creias?" () became the third single released from "Entre A Mi Mundo". The song peaked at number 14 on the Hot Latin Tracks. "Como La Flor", "La Carcacha" and "¿Qué Creias?" helped Selena to be accepted into Mexico. She began touring there for the first time and broke several audience attendance records. After Selena had won her first Grammy Award for "Selena Live!" (1993), the album released three singles. "No Debes Jugar" (), "La Llamada" () and "Tu Robaste Mi Corazon" () peaked within the top five of the Hot Latin Tracks chart.

When "Amor Prohibido" (1994) was released, it had four number-one singles. Selena became the first Hispanic singer to do this. The four number-one singles were "Amor Prohibido" (), "Bidi Bidi Bom Bom", "No Me Queda Mas" () and "Fotos y Recuerdos" (). These songs helped expanded Selena's fan base. The non-album single "Donde Quiera Que Estes" () peaked at number-one on both the Hot Latin Tracks and Latin Regional Mexican Airplay charts. The song was a duet with the Barrio Boyzz. The song made Selena to tour in New York City, Puerto Rico, South America and Central America where she was not known before. The songs "Amor Prohibido" and "No Me Queda Mas" became the most successful singles of 1994 and 1995 in the United States Hispanic communities and Mexico.

Selena began recording songs for her crossover album. She only recorded six by January 20, 1995. She was killed on March 31, 1995. The album was released on July 18, 1995 as "Dreaming of You". "I Could Fall in Love" peaked at number-one on the Hot Latin Tracks while also peaking in eight different countries worldwide. "Dreaming of You" peaked at number-one in five different music charts worldwide. The song peaked in 13 different countries worldwide. It sold 4,798,706 copies worldwide, while selling 2,000,000 copies in the United States. The song was certified double-platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America. The song was given 11 certifications worldwide. It is among the best-selling singles worldwide. It is the second-fastest-selling single of 1995 in the United States. The song was the 83rd best-selling single of the 1990s in the United Kingdom. It also became the 65th best-selling single of the 1990s in France. "Dreaming of You" and "I Could Fall in Love" continues to be played on radio stations in the United States. The most recent peak positions for the songs was in 2010. The Barrio Boyzz recorded their duet with Selena in English for the crossover album. The English version stood on Spain's music chart for two years straight. After Selena's murder, eighteen singles were released. Many of those peaked in music charts in the United States, Spanish-speaking countries, France and Canada.




