Croatian Liberation Movement

Croatian Liberation Movement ( or HOP) was initially an exiled Ustaše terrorist group formed in Argentina in 1956. Today the same group is registered as a marginal right-wing party in Croatia.
Croatian Liberation Movement was established by Ante Pavelić in Buenos Aires in 1956. The goal of this group was to control original Ustaše organization. Pavelić then enjoyed protection of Argentina's dictator Juan Peron. . A prominent role in HOP, with the aim of keeping Ustaše ideals and infrastructure intact, had Pavelić's daughter Višnja. At those times HOP, in their writings and proclamations, tried to clear of any blame the Ustaše regime stressing the resistance of the movement to existence of Yugoslavia. Their writings compared Ustaše to earlier French and American revolutionaries. Ustaše main goals were described as defense of Croatia against Serbian aggression and against international Communism. When Peron lost power, Israeli attempted to force Argentina to extradite Pavelić. In 1957, after a failed attempt to assassinate Pavelić, he and his family moved via Chile to Spain, where Pavelić got protection of General Franco. Pavelić died on 28 December 1959, at the German hospital in Madrid.

After Pavelić's death, his son-in-law Srečko Pšeničnik took over HOP and in 1960, moved its operations from Buenos Aires to Toronto, Canada. HOP newspaper, called Independent State of Croatia, continued to publish agitations for the downfall of Communist Yugoslavia.

Several members of this organization were involved in the terrorist attacks in Yugoslavia, arrested there and were, on June 25 1964, sentenced for manslaughter and other terrorist acts. 

The head of US HOP chapter was Stjepan Hefer, minister of agriculture and food in the Pavelić's regime. After his death, another Ustaše high ranked official, Anton Bonifačić took over the HOP leadership. Bonifačić was a head of cultural affair of the Foreign Ministry in the Ustaše regime. Bonifačić posed in public as a writer and an anti-communist, giving speeches and passing resolutions on the continuing struggle for the Independent State of Croatia.. Bonifačić's presidency lasted from October 1975 through July 1981.

The chapter of HOP was established in 1963 in Australia. Ustaše Srećko Rover, who emigrated to Australia in 1948, was appointed head of this chapter. In 1972 Rover was elected vice-chairman of another terrorist organization, HNO (Croatian National Resistance).

In Australia, this terrorist group was reorganized by Pavelić's successor, Stjepan Hefer in 1967. Hefer was the head of this terrorist group until his death in 1973 .

By 1966, and within the next several years, the HOP carried out a series of assassinations and attacks on Yugoslav diplomat missions and the airline office. Their terrorist activities on the Australian soil and recorded military exercises with the Australian Army's Citizens Military Forces (CMF) prompted Australian senator from Tasmania, O'Byrne, to start action against HOP before the Australian Parliament controlled then by Australian Liberal Party. Many of HOP members were members of the Australian Liberal Party that time. This party membership along with the Cold War atmosphere provided a smoke screen behind this group carried their terrorist activities in early 1970-ies. When the Australian Democratic Labour Party came to the power in 1972, Australian Attorney-General approved the wire-tapping of suspected terrorist leaders such as Srećko Rover and Fabian Lovoković - the head of the HOP in Australia. For terrorist training purposes HOP used an Australian army Wodonga camp in the Victoria state.

The Croatian Liberation Movement, along with the Croatian National Resistance, were dreaming about resurrection of the Independent State of Croatia well into 1980s. These two movements infiltrated the benevolent societies and cultural clubs of the Croatian immigrants.

The same organization were mentioned in the renown Alperin vs. Vatican Bank case before the United States District Court for the Northern District of California. The Holocaust Survivors claim that the Vatican Bank, the Order of Friars Minor, and the Croatian Liberation Movement were complicit in and profited from crimes committed during World War II by the Ustaše. The district court dismissed the claims (2003) against the Croatian Liberation Movement for lack of personal jurisdiction. This dismissal was upheld by Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals (2005).

During the Yugoslavia disintegration, in the early 1990s, this organization moved to Zagreb, Croatia, where it was officially registered as a political party in Croatia in 1991.

This a far right and openly pro-Ustaše party is a marginal political party in Croatia. It came into public limelight for paying a requiem mass for the Ustaše leader Pavelić in the Church of Saint Dominic in Split, 1997.



