Adaptive Combat Rifle

The Adaptive Combat Rifle (ACR) is a fully automatic assault rifle. It was designed by Magpul Industries of Erie, Colorado. In late January 2008, Bushmaster made a licensing agreement with Magpul. In this agreement, Bushmaster would take over the making, development and sales of the ACR.

The rifle was developed over five months. It was supposed to replace the M16 rifle completely. It was also supposed to do this without money from the government. Prototypes were shown at the 2007 SHOT Show in Orlando, Florida. It was supposed to be released some time in 2008. However, Bushmaster said on May 16, 2008 that the ACR would not be released to the public until 2009. This is because Bushmaster were focusing more on military projects. On November 18, 2008, Bushmaster released a statement saying, "The ACR is being redesigned to be a superior offering to compete for the next generation US Army infantry carbine and subcompact weapon requirement and will be available to select customers in 2009."

The ACR was one of the weapons shown to the U.S. Army during an Industry Day on November 13, 2008. This Industry Day happened so that modern carbines could be looked at before it was decided what the weapon that would replace the M4 Carbine had to be like.

The first design is many recent rifle designs combined. Its designers say that it takes the best parts of each and puts them into a light, modular rifle. Some features from the Armalite AR-18, the FN SCAR, the Heckler & Koch G36/XM8, the M16/AR-15, and the M16 can be seen clearly. Experts from Magpul have said many times that depending on how long the barrel is, the amount of bullets fired is around 600-800 rounds every minute. (This is an estimate). The weapon's caliber can easily be changed by changing the bolt head, magazine and barrel.

The United States was designing a carbine to replace the M4 carbine.

Bushmaster Firearms, with help from Remington Arms (a sister company) has made many design changes. These were made to meet what the U.S. military needed. The ACR can be bought by both the military and civilians. Bushmaster says that they will soon have kits which can change the caliber of the rifle. It is expected that the ACR will be able to be bought with a choice of: 10.5″, 12.5″, 14.5″, 16″ (commercial), and 18″ barrels. One kind of ACR made by Remington has been shown as part of the Army's Individual Carbine competition.

The magazine for the 5.56mm version of the ACR rifle is called the Magpul PMag. It can hold 30 rounds. Magpul says that it is much more difficult to break or damage than other magazines. The PMag can also fit the rifles in the M16 rifle family.

The ACR was made not to break if it was exposed to things like sand, dirt, mud, and water.

It is said that the ACR will be available some time in 2010. It will be able to be bought by military, government and civilian customers. The ACR will be available in larger numbers in 2010. Bushmaster says that the rifle should cost between $2,685–$3,061.00 Semi-automatic versions will be available to civilians from Bushmaster. Remington will sell selective fire versions for the police and military.

On October 15, 2010, Bushmaster asked customers for all the ACRs back. They said: "Please immediately discontinue the use of your ACR rifle" (please immediately stop using your ACR). They also said to contact customer support. Bushmaster said that they recalled the rifles because "Bushmaster discovered a design flaw which could result in multiple rounds firing continuously when the trigger is pulled" (Bushmaster discovered a fault in the design that could mean that many rounds could be fired when the trigger is pulled). Bushmaster said that it would pay for the repairs on the rifles.




