Kingdom of the Two Sicilies

The Kingdom of the Two Sicilies was a kingdom in southern Italy from 1816 until 1861. It was created by Ferdinand I of the Two Sicilies, after the Congress of Vienna of 1814, by uniting the Kingdom of Sicily and the Kingdom of Naples, which had been ruled by Joseph Bonaparte during the reign of Napoleon. It was ruled by a cadet branch of the House of Bourbon. 

The capital of the kingdom was Naples. Roman Catholicism was the state religion. The House of Bourbon was the ruling dynasty. The kingdom was full of corruption and poverty: mainly because of this, most of the population welcomed the Risorgimento with the unification of southern Italy to the rest of Italy in 1861.

In 1861, Sicily was captured by Giuseppe Garibaldi and his men, who were known as "red shirts". This was welcomed by the local population. Garibaldi then crossed the Strait of Messina and captured Naples. It then joined the Kingdom of Italy.

The peninsula was divided into fifteen "departments" and the island of Sicily was divided into seven departments. The island itself had a special administrative status, with its base at Palermo.

In 1860, when the Two Sicilies were conquered by Garibaldi, the departments later became provinces of Italy, according to the so called "Rattazzi law".

For a time the heir to the throne was given the title of "Hereditary Prince of Naples". But this was later changed to the Duke of Calabria after the uniting of the two kingdoms. Collectively the royal family generally lived at the Palace of Caserta. Children of the monarch were born with the style of "Royal Highness" as well as the title of Prince/ss of the Two Sicilies. Several males in the family were given titles such as "Duke of Castro", "Count of Caserta", "Prince of Salerno", a majority of which were lost due to a lack of male heirs. The present pretending monarch is Infante Carlos, Duke of Calabria, who does use the title of Duke of Calabria. 

<nowiki>*</nowiki> The city of Benevento was formally included in this department, but it was occupied by the Papal States and was "de facto" an exclave of that country.


