Documents on the Persian Gulf's name

Documents on the Persian Gulf's name the eternal heritage ancient time is a book and atlas written and compiled by Dr. M. Ajam. It was published first on 2004. A second edition was published under the supervision of Dr. Pirouz Mojtahedzadeh and Dr.M. Ganji in 2009. The book was chosen as a candidate to receive prize of the book of the year 2010 in Iran. the book was considered among the best books in the last 50 years on Persian Gulf issues in Iran.
A documentary film titled "Persian Gulf Name in the Course of History" has been filmed, mainly based on this book. Part of the book has published in the website the UNGEGN.
The book has 6 chapters.

The first chapter covers geographical and political issues of the Persian Gulf, historical recorded documents on the "Persian Gulf" name, the recent Persian Gulf naming dispute, and the 3 Islands.

1-1 The records and description the Persian Gulf by early Travelers and Geographers, including written description by Muslim travelers and European geographers.

Record the 300 historians, travelers and geographers of The Middle Ages, especially those writing in Arabic and Persian from the 9th to the 15th century.


Some of the most important historical atlases of the Persian gulf and the regions are as:
1- Atlas "The Arabian Peninsula in Old European Maps" (253 maps) by Khaled Al Ankary, Institute du Monde Arabe,Paris and Tunisia University,2001
all 253 maps of this atlas have been printed in color and 3 languages and have the correct name of Persian gulf.

Focus first on the controversy between Iran and Arab countries and how it developed
Mentions other names used by other countries and throughout history.

part 2 page 170-216 .view points those defending no change in geographical names.
persian gulf.sinus persicus.percy golf. pars sea

colonialist time of controlling Persian gulf . Portuguese, Netherlands and British.
For about 200 years, from 1763 until 1971, the United Kingdom kept some control over some of the Persian Gulf lands. The lands were current states of the United Arab Emirates and at various times Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, and Qatar.





