Glee (season 2)

The second season of the musical comedy-drama television show "Glee" originally premiered on September 21, 2010 and ended on May 24, 2011 on FOX in the United States. The second season had 22 episodes and was produced by 20th Century Fox Television and Ryan Murhpy Television. Dante Di Loreto became the executive producer while Ryan Murphy and Brad Falchuk, the show co-creators, remained writing the episodes along with Ian Brennan. The second season features the "New Directions" glee club at the fictional William McKinley High School in Lima, Ohio. It also shows the glee club in several competitions; local, regional and nationals which was held in New York City. The club members in this season began dealing with relationship, sexuality and social issues. 

The second season's main cast were; director of glee club Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison), cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester (Jane Lynch), guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury (Jayma Mays), and glee club members Artie Abrams (Kevin McHale), Brittany Pierce (Heather Morris), Finn Hudson (Cory Monteith), Kurt Hummel (Chris Colfer), Mercedes Jones (Amber Riley), Noah "Puck" Puckerman (Mark Salling), Quinn Fabray (Dianna Agron), Rachel Berry (Lea Michele), Santana Lopez (Naya Rivera), Tina Cohen-Chang (Jenna Ushkowitz) and Will's ex-wife Terri (Jessalyn Gilsig). Kurt's father Burt (Mike O'Malley) becomes a main character in this season.

Each episode of the second season received positive reviews from music and television journalists, however, the entire season was given a more mixed reception. The musical performances in the second season had more dance numbers and cover versions than the first season. The show released five soundtrack albums and over one hundred digital singles. The cast broke the record for "most charted songs by an act" in the 52-year history of the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart. The singles "Teenage Dream" (originally recorded by Katy Perry) and "Loser Like Me" (an original song), were the first to have over 200,000 downloads in their first week of release in the US. Both had also charted in the top ten in the US and Canada, and were certified Gold in the US. The second season was nominated for twelve Emmy Awards, five Golden Globe Awards, five Satellite Awards and over fifty other awards. There has been three DVDs to have been released with episodes from the season: "Glee - Season 2, Volume 1" which includes episodes one through ten, "Glee - Season 2, Volume 2" which includes episodes eleven through twenty-two, and "Glee - The Complete Second Season".


