Marlene Favela

Silvia Marlene Favela Meraz (born on August 5, 1976 in Santiago Papasquiaro, Durango, Mexico) is a Mexican actress and model She is known for acting in many soap operas. These include "Gata Salvaje", "El Zorro, the Sword and the Rose", "The Heirs of Mount" and "'s face Vengeance". She was also in the American movie "Species - The Awakening". 

Favela started in show business as a model. She later studied at Centro de Educación Artística (Center of Arts Education) of Televisa in Mexico City. Favela made a first appearance as a cheerleader of a television program called "Shrimp that falls Asleep".

Later, she began to work with soap operas. These included "The Beach House", "Baby Face", "The Intruder" and "Between love and hate". Her first success came with "Wildcat", because, previously, had always done roles; telenovela starring latter earned her the nickname" "wildcat "" for the general public.

She has also worked in theater with actors like Helena Rojo and Julio German, in Again, Sam and are unfaithful and do not look who, respectively, also participated as a presenter of a program called Meridian X, which dealt about extreme sports.

Later in soap operas and always participated in Bridal Veil, where facing the co-starring role, produced by Juan Osorio and years later, also participated in Ruby, under the production of José Alberto Castro, playing the character of Sonia, along with Barbara Mori

After these appearances returned to star in a soap opera, with Against all odds, where, plays the character of Natalia Rios.

Starred in the telenovela Zorro, the Sword and the Rose was the first soap opera in history to HD, this is the most ambitious project of her career so far. The show was held in by Telemundo in collaboration with Sony Pictures and with a remarkable cast of actors like Christian Meier and Harry Geithner, which they interpret as weight papers are that of Diego de la Vega / Zorro and the Military Commander Ricardo Montero.

During 2008-2009, respectively, the beautiful Mexican took a break, in which she rejected the title roles of Doña Bella (RCN) and Beware the angel (Televisa ) with William Levy

In 2011 returns to screens Telemundo to star in the telenovela Del Monte Heirs again with Mario Cimarro. This production was recorded in Colombia and has actors such as Jose Luis Resendez, Roberto Mateos, and Natasha Klauss, among others.

In Hollywood she acted in the movie Species - The Awakening, where comparía sign with stars such as:
Helena Mattsson, Adam Wylie, Ben Cross, Marco Bacuzzi and Dominic Keating.

In 2012 returns to screens Venevision to star in the novel Heart passionate in which she won the lead role in history alongside Guy Ecker and Susana Dosamantes. This production is recorded in Miami and has actors Lorena Meritano, Daniela Navarro, Dayana Garroz, Carlos Guillermo Haydon among others. In late August, after signing an exclusive contract with Telemundo, the actress performs a dual role in The Bruiser Where does a star / antagonize melodrama after the end of the characters in Maritza Rodriguez and Elizabeth Gutierrez

For actress Marlene Favela important things in life: her parents and family. She maintained a relationship from 2009 to 2010 with Jorge Kahwagi. Currently in a relationship with Guy Davidyan, in that one year in relationship.

Marlene Favela, suffered a stroke On July 27 of 2012.

The actress was at her home in Miami when she began to feel a tingling in the hands, nausea, dizziness, difficulty speaking, so I immediately went to Mount Sinai Hospital. Favela thought she had poisoned by eating seafood, but it turned out she had a stroke that could have been fatal, but thanks to the quick intervention of doctors was saved.

In the hospital, Favela underwent surgery for intracranial bleeding was caused by a congenital disease. The actress told that could have gone blind or die.

This terrible experienciale Favela served to realize that she is a much loved and put in a new perspective on life, believing her to relax and take better care of their health and focus more on being with your loved ones.




