Interior design

Interior designing is a process that can turn interior (inside) spaces into an effective setting (environment) suitable for people's activities and functions.

An interior designer is a person who creates a solution of any interior space. Also, he works on layout spaces of building and technical issues such as lighting, sounds, and temperature (air ducts).

Important things in interior designing include color balancing (matching colors), understanding how colors affect space and moods, knowledge of fabrics, building and electrical codes, and styles and trends.

These steps are required for an interior designer to do a perfect job.

There are specific types of interior design and specializations. Some types of interior design are residential design, commercial design, hospitality design, healthcare design, universal design, exhibition design, and spatial branding.

The designer tries to help customers look after their needs at home, their personality, and style and goals which make the home more comfortable. The designer should dose what the home needs, such as security and convenience. 

Commercial interior designers design public spaces such as office buildings, community centers, museums, hotels, stores, warehouses, and libraries. In commercial design the designer have to create an environment that includes function and aesthetics. A commercial interior designer's work includes selecting paint colors, choosing artwork, accounting for acoustics and lighting, picking appropriate furniture, and placing all these together in the manner most appropriate to the venue. Recently commercial interior designers have worked with indoor plants and agro-inventions such as the Grofie Greenwall, which allows firms to bring a tropical forest, vegetable or herb garden right into the office, in order to reconnect office workers with nature. 

Hospitality designers design the places which have any relationship between guest and host such as hotels. This includes the reception and entertainment of guests, visitors or strangers, resorts, membership clubs, conventions, attractions, special events, and other services for travelers and tourists.

Healthcare design is related to hospitals and how to make a good space to make the patient and staff very comfortable. Healthcare designers compare the evidence-based design with evidence-based medicine; that knowledge can help ensures that future healthcare facilities are built to improve clinical outcomes. In addition deeper understanding of the relationship between the built environment and quality of care will help ensure that healthcare facilities are designed to meet the diverse needs of patients, families, and staff.

Universal design is the design for all people around the world and to creating environments and products those are usable by all people to the greatest extent possible.

There are many different types of exhibit, ranging from museum exhibitions, to retail and trades show spaces, to themed attractions, zoos and visitor centers. All types of exhibits aim to communicate a message through engaging their audiences in meaningful and compelling interactions. Use a wide range of technologies and techniques to develop experiences that will resonate with diverse audiences–enabling these targeted audiences to access the messages, stories and objects of an exhibit.






