Alesha Dixon

Alesha Anjanette Dixon (born 7 October 1978) is a British singer and television personality. She was born in Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire, England. Her mother was English. Her father was Jamaican. She was a member of the British girl band, Mis-Teeq. She released her first UK solo album, "The Alesha Show", in 2008.

Dixon's career began in 1999 when she met Sabrina Washington. They had both joined Dance Attic (a popular dance class school in West London). They recorded a demo called "Inspiration". During an audition, they met with Su-Elise Nash, and then formed a trio. They were soon signed to Telstar Records with a new member, Zena McNally. They became the popular UK garage/R&B girl band, Mis-Teeq. They released their first single, "Why?", in 2000. Soon, McNally left the band to perform by herself. The band decided to remain a trio.

In 2001, they released their first album "Lickin' On Both Sides". It had the songs "All I Want", "One Night Stand", "B With Me" and "Roll On / This Is How We Do It". In 2003, they released their second album "Eye Candy". That album had the songs "Scandalous", "Can't Get It Back" and "Style". In 2004, Mis-Teeq toured the United States. They released their first single "Scandalous" from their first American album "Mis-Teeq"."MisTeeq" was a compilation of the albums "Lickin' On Both Sides" and "Eye Candy". They released "One Night Stand" before coming back to Europe to start work with their third album. However, Telstar Records was shut down and the band had to have a 'Greatest Hits' compilation released under exclusive licenses with Universal Recording Company.

Dixon appeared in the N*E*R*D* music video for "She Wants to Move". That song was from their second album "Fly Or Die". The last song she recorded with her band was "Shoo Shoo Baby". It was recorded for the Disney movie "Valiant". In March 2005, they released their 'Greatest Hits' compilation. They also announced that they were going to start working separately. Dixon later announced that she signed a ₤500,000 contract deal with Polydor Records. She also announced that she will work on material for her first solo album. In the summer of 2005, she married her long-time fiancé, rapper MC Harvey (formerly of So Solid Crew).

Dixon spent a year preparing for her solo first album, "Fired Up". In June 2005, she announced the single "Superficial". After the song leaked illegally, the company said her next single would be "Lipstick". She released "Lipstick" on 14 August 2006. It went to #13 on the UK Single Charts. Dixon worked with several producers for her first solo album, including Richard X, Xenomania, Johnny Douglas, Brian Higgins, and Paul Eppe. She worked on a song with famous UK rapper Estelle.

Dixon announced that her second single would be "Knock Down". She calls the song "reggae-influenced". It was released on 30 October 2006. An album promo of "Fired Up" was released during the early weeks of September. It had the songs "Lipstick", "Knock Down", "Ting-A-Ling", "Fired Up", and "Free". All those songs were expected to be on her first album.

After "Knock Down" did not chart in the top 40 her record company dumped her. "Fired Up" was not released anywhere except Japan. After winning "Strictly Come Dancing" in 2007 she made a comeback. In 2008, Dixon released "The Boy Does Nothing", the lead single from her album "The Alesha Show". She then released "Breathe Slow" which charted at #3 on the UK singles chart. That was her highest-charting single so far.

Dixon released her third album, "The Entertainer", in 2010.

Dixon gave birth to her first child, Azura Sienna, in 2013.




