SN1 reaction

The S1 reaction is a substitution reaction in organic chemistry. "S" stands for nucleophilic substitution and the "1" represents the fact that the rate-determining step involves only one molecule (unimolecular). The reaction involves a carbocation intermediate. Some common S1 reactions are of secondary or tertiary alkyl halides under strongly basic conditions or, under strongly acidic conditions, with secondary or tertiary alcohols. With primary alkyl halides, the alternative S2 reaction occurs. Among inorganic chemists, the S1 reaction is often known as the "dissociative mechanism". Christopher Ingold et al. first proposed the reaction mechanism in 1940.

An example of a reaction taking place with an S1 reaction mechanism is the hydrolysis of tert-butyl bromide with water to form tert-butyl alcohol:

This S1 reaction takes place in three steps:


Because the first step is the bottleneck or "rate-determining step" chemists classify the entire reaction mechanism as S1. Only one molecule is needed for that step.

Sometimes a molecule can react using either an S1 or an S2 mechanism.
The S1 mechanism will win this competition when the central carbon atom is surrounded by bulky groups because such groups sterically hinder the S2 reaction. Additionally, bulky substituents on the central carbon increase the rate of carbocation formation because of the relief of steric strain that occurs. The resultant carbocation is also stabilized by both inductive stabilization and hyperconjugation from attached alkyl groups. The Hammond-Leffler postulate says that this too will increase the rate of carbocation formation. The S1 mechanism therefore dominates in reactions at tertiary alkyl centers and is further observed at secondary alkyl centers in the presence of weak nucleophiles.

An example of a reaction proceeding in a S1 way is the synthesis of "2,5-dichloro-2,5-dimethylhexane" from the corresponding diol with concentrated hydrochloric acid:
As the alpha and beta substitutions increase with respect to leaving groups, the reaction is diverted from S2 to S1.

The carbocation intermediate formed in the reaction's rate limiting step is an "sp" hybridized carbon with trigonal planar molecular geometry. This allows two different paths for the nucleophilic attack, one on either side of the planar molecule. If neither path is preferentially favored, these two paths will be used equally, yielding a racemic mix of enantiomers if the reaction takes place at a stereocenter. This is illustrated below in the S1 reaction of S-3-chloro-3-methylhexane with an iodide ion, which yields a racemic mixture of 3-iodo-3-methylhexane:

However, an excess of one stereoisomer can be observed, as the leaving group can remain close to the carbocation intermediate for a short time and block nucleophilic attack. This is very different than the S2 mechanism, which does not mix the stereochemistry of the product (a stereospecific mechanism). The S2 mechanism always inverts the molecule's stereochemistry.

Two common side reactions are elimination reactions and carbocation rearrangement. If the reaction is performed under warm or hot conditions (which favor an increase in entropy), E1 elimination is likely to predominate, leading to formation of an alkene. At lower temperatures, S1 and E1 reactions are competitive reactions. So, it becomes difficult to favor one over the other. Even if the reaction is performed cold, some alkene may be formed. If an attempt is made to perform an S1 reaction using a strongly basic nucleophile such as hydroxide or methoxide ion, the alkene will again be formed, this time via an E2 elimination. This will be especially true if the reaction is heated. Finally, if the carbocation intermediate can rearrange to a more stable carbocation, it will give a product derived from the more stable carbocation rather than the simple substitution product.

Solvents will change the reaction rate. Since the S1 reaction involves formation of an unstable carbocation intermediate in the rate-determining step, anything that can help this will speed up the reaction. The normal solvents of choice are both "polar" (to stabilize ionic intermediates in general) and "protic" (to solvate the leaving group in particular). Typical polar protic solvents include water and alcohols, which will also act as nucleophiles.

The Y scale correlates solvolysis reaction rates of any solvent (k) with that of a standard solvent (80% v/v ethanol/water) (k) through

formula_1

with "m" a reactant constant ("m" = 1 for tert-butyl chloride),
For example 100% ethanol gives Y = −2.3, 50% ethanol in water Y = +1.65 and 15% concentration Y = +3.2.




