LaGuardia Airport

LaGuardia Airport () is an airport in the northern part of the New York City borough of Queens. The airport is on the edge of Flushing Bay and Bowery Bay. It borders the neighborhoods of Astoria, Jackson Heights and East Elmhurst.

LaGuardia is the smallest of the New York metropolitan area's three main airports. The other two are John F. Kennedy International Airport (JFK) in southern Queens and Newark Liberty International Airport in Newark, New Jersey. LaGuardia is the closest of the three to Manhattan. It is larger than other airports near Manhattan - Long Island MacArthur Airport in Suffolk County, Westchester County Airport in Westchester County, and Stewart International Airport in Newburgh, New York. La Guardia is popular because of its location near to Manhattan. Although the airport is small in size, wide-body aircraft once used it often. The McDonnell Douglas DC-10 and Lockheed L-1011 were designed for use at LaGuardia. From 2000 to 2005, Delta used the 767-400ER with 285 seats. Today, there are usually no widebody flights. Delta Air Lines does use a Boeing 767-300 at times for one of its Atlanta flights. On July 11, 2012, the airport became a domestic hub for Delta Air Lines. It is also a focus city for American Airlines and American Eagle.

The New York City metropolitan area's John F. Kennedy International Airport, LaGuardia, and Newark Liberty International airports are the largest airport system in the United States. They are the second most busy system of airports in the world by number of passengers. They are the first in the world in terms of total flight operations. In 2010, the airport had just under 24.0 million passenger. JFK had 46.5 million and Newark had 33.1 million. A total of about 104 million travelers used New York airports.

Most flights from LaGuardia go to locations inside the United States and Canada. Some flights also go to Aruba, the Bahamas, and Bermuda because those locations are have United States border preclearance facilities. The airport has ICE/CPB facilities to deal with customs and immigration for international flights but they cannot deal with a large number of passengers at one time. LaGuardia is the busiest airport in the United States without any non-stop flights to and from Europe. Nonstop flights to or from LaGuardia are limited to only . This does not include flights on Saturdays and flights to Denver. Because of this most flights across the continent and international flights use JFK or Newark.

The airport was first named Glenn H. Curtiss Airport. It was named for Glenn Hammond Curtiss. It was later renamed North Beach Airport. New York City took control of the airport and named it New York Municipal Airport-LaGuardia Field. In 1953, it was named "LaGuardia Airport" for Fiorello La Guardia, the mayor of New York when the airport was built. The airport is run by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.




