Stephen Colbert

Stephen Tyrone Colbert (pronounced col-BEAR) (born May 13, 1964) is an American actor, comedian, and author. He is the current host of "The Late Show with Stephen Colbert". He was the host of "The Colbert Report" on Comedy Central from 2005 through 2014. Colbert has used a special form of comedy called satire to make fun of politicians and the news media. 

Colbert was born in Washington, D.C.. He grew up in Charleston, South Carolina. He was the youngest of eleven children in a Catholic family, and went to Northwestern University.

On "The Colbert Report" (which he pronounces "col-BEAR re-POAR" to make the words sound the same), he pretends to be a right-wing talk show host. He likes to ask his guests very embarrassing questions that make it seem that he is a serious far right-wing conservative who is also not very smart. His TV personality centers on the idea that if enough people believe something, it will be true. This is largely based on conservative host Bill O'Reilly. He was granted a Super PAC for the South Carolina Republican Party primaries in the 2012 U.S. presidential election.

Many famous American politicians and people in the news media agree to appear on his show because it is very popular. Colbert started as a comedy writer and performer for many other programs, such as "The Daily Show" and the "Strangers with Candy" movie, both also on Comedy Central.

On April 10, 2014, CBS announced in a press release that Colbert will succeed David Letterman as the host of "The Late Show", effective when Mr. Letterman retires from the broadcast." On January 12, 2015, CBS announced that Colbert would premiere as the "Late Show" host on Tuesday, September 8, 2015.

He has also voiced Phil Ken Sebben and Reducto in Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law. Colbert has written three books." I Am America (And So Can You!)" was No. 1 on The New York Times Best Seller list.

Colbert married his wife in 1993. He lives in Montclair, New Jersey with his wife and three children. 

He has made a word, 'truthiness'. At least four species have been given scientific names honoring Colbert.





