Suicidal Tendencies

Suicidal Tendencies is a hardcore punk band, which started in 1981 in Venice, California. Since their start, they had a lot of members come and go. Their lead singer Mike Muir is their only permanent member. They are credited by many as one of "the fathers of crossover thrash". Today, Suicidal Tendencies have released nine studio albums, one EP, four split albums, five compilation albums, and two long-form videos. They have not released an album of original material since 2000's "Free Your Soul and Save My Mind". But they released a small number of new songs that had not been released before on the split/compilation albums "Friends & Family, Vol. 2" (2001), "Year of the Cycos" (2008), "No Mercy Fool!/The Suicidal Family" (2010) and "The Mad Mad Muir Musical Tour" (2011).

Suicidal Tendencies became well known when they released their self-titled debut album in 1983. It spawned the single "Institutionalized", which was one of the first hardcore punk videos to get substantial airplay on MTV. Suicidal Tendencies had not released their second album until 1987, with "Join the Army". It was the album that got the attention of Epic Records, who signed Suicidal Tendencies in 1988, the same year they released their third album "How Will I Laugh Tomorrow When I Can't Even Smile Today". People began to recognize Suicidal Tendencies more when they released the albums "Controlled by Hatred/Feel Like Shit...Déjà Vu" and "Lights...Camera...Revolution!", which were both certified Gold by the RIAA. The band made two more albums, "The Art of Rebellion" and "Suicidal for Life", and then broke up in 1995 while serving ties with from Sony and Epic. However, Suicidal Tendencies reformed in 1997 and have continued recording and performing ever since. After over a decade of work and many lineup changes, the band is planning to release first album with all-new material in 12 years in 2012.

They made nine studio albums, one EP, four split albums, five compilation albums, and two long-form videos.






