Governor of Idaho

The Governor of Idaho is the head of the executive branch of Idaho's government. He is also the commander-in-chief of the state's militia. The job of the governor is to see that the state laws are obeyed. The governor has the power to either approve or veto bills passed by the Idaho Legislature.

Idaho Territory had 16 territorial governors chosed by the President of the United States from 1863 until it became a state in 1890. Four of these never took office. They resigned before they got to Idaho.

Thirty people have been Governor of Idaho since it became a state in 1890. Two of these—C. A. Bottolfsen and Cecil D. Andrus—served non-consecutive terms. The state's first governor was George Laird Shoup. He had the shortest term - three months. Cecil D. Andrus served as governor the longest at 14 years. Four governors resigned. None have died while in office. There have been 20 Republican and 12 Democratic governors. The current governor is C. L. "Butch" Otter. He took office on January 1, 2007. His current term will expire in January 2015.

Idaho Territory was created from Dakota Territory, Nebraska Territory, and Washington Territory on March 4, 1863. At first, the territory included all of modern-day Idaho and Montana, and most of Wyoming. On May 26, 1864, Montana Territory was separated from Idaho Territory, and most of the Wyoming portion was became part of Dakota Territory. The area east of the 111th meridian became part of the new Wyoming Territory on July 25, 1868. This gave Idaho Territory its final borders.

Because of the long distance between Washington, D.C. and Boise, there was often a long time between a governor being chosen and his arrival in the territory. 

Idaho became a state on July 3, 1890. Since then, the state has had 30 governors. Two of these served non-consecutive terms. The terms for governor and lieutenant governor are four years. It starts on the first Monday in the January after the election. Before 1946, the offices were elected to terms of two years. If there is no governor or the governor is out of state or cannot do his duties, the lieutenant governor acts as governor. If neither the governor and lieutenant governor can do their duties, the President "pro tempore" of the Idaho Senate is next in line. After that person, the Speaker of the Idaho House of Representatives would act as governor. There is no limit to the number of terms a governor may serve.

Sixteen of Idaho's governors have served higher federal offices or as governors of other states. Nine have served in the U.S. Senate, and three have served in the U.S. House. Two governors have been U.S. Secretaries of the Interior. One served as ambassador to the Ottoman Empire. Six governors (marked with *) resigned to take a new office.

Also, two people who were appointed governor of Idaho Territory but never took office held other high offices. Gilman Marston was a representative and senator from New Hampshire. John Philo Hoyt was Governor of Arizona Territory.

All representatives and senators listed represented Idaho except where noted.

, five former governors were alive. The most recent death of a former governor was that of Robert E. Smylie (1955–1967). He died at age 89 on July 17, 2004. 





