John Forsythe

John Forsythe (born Jacob Lincoln Freund; January 29, 1918 April 1, 2010) was an American stage, television, and movie actor.

Forsythe born on January 29, 1918 in Penns Grove, New Jersey to Blanche Materson (née Blohm) and to Samuel Jeremiah Freund. Forsythe was the oldest of three. Forsythe was raised in Brooklyn, New York. He was educated at Abraham Lincoln High School and at University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill along with late actors R. G. Armstrong and Andy Griffith. 

His career began when he was an announcer for the Brooklyn Dodgers. Forsythe's movie career began in 1943 in the movie "Northern Pursuit" and since then he had appeared in many movies such as; "Destination Tokyo", "Escape from Fort Bravo", "Madame X", "Topaz", "Scrooged", and his final movie was the 2003 movie "" that is the sequel to the movie that is based on the television series "Charlie's Angels" in which Forsythe starred in. 

Forsythe had starred in television series, but his most notable television works is in "Dynasty" as Blake Carrington and as Charles Townsend in the hit series "Charlie's Angels". Forsythe was also in "The Powers That Be", and was a Miss Universe host in 1989.

Forsythe has won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Television Series Drama in 1984 for his role in "Dynasty". 

Forsythe was married three times. He married Parker McCormick in 1939. They divorced in 1943. He married Julie Warren in 1943. She died in 1994 when Forsythe decided to turn her off of life support when she had breathing problems. He married Nicole Carter in 2003. They were married until his death in 2010. Forsythe had a son, two daughters, six grandchildren, and four great-grandchildren.

Forsythe died on April 1, 2010 from complications of pneumonia in Santa Ynez, California. He was 92 years old. His widow Nicole Carter died 40 days later. He is buried at Oak Hill Cemetery in Santa Barbara, California. He is survived by his son, his two daughters, siz grandchildren, and four great-grandchildren.



