Anders Behring Breivik

Anders Behring Breivik (born 13 February 1979) is a Norwegian terrorist and perpetrator of the 2011 Norway attacks. The attacks were on 22 July 2011, when Breivik bombed the government buildings in Oslo, which caused eight deaths, and then he went on to carry out a mass shooting at a camp of the Workers' Youth League of the Labour Party, which ended in 69 deaths, most of whom were teenagers. He was charged with violating paragraph 147a of the Norwegian Criminal Code, which is "destabilising or destroying basic functions of society" and "creating serious fear in the population", acts of terrorism under the criminal law and ordered held for eight weeks; the first four in solitary confinement which was pending further court proceedings. 

Breivik has sued Norway; he won part of his lawsuit in the district court in 2016, but lost in the higher courts in 2017; he has formally asked European Court of Human Rights, if that court can try his case against Norway.

Breivik was born and raised in Oslo. 

Breivik failed to develop a stable and safe identity when he was at schools, and the places where he worked, and on internet forums about politics, and in the world of gaming, and as a result he turned the defeats, shame, and hate, towards society,
said Svein Østerud professor emeritus.

In Norway, as of 2017, Breivik has become [, to a degree,] "the person whose name shall not be mentioned", claimed an article in Dagsavisen; furthermore, if Norway [wishes] to fight against what he stood for, then one must study "step by step" why [the attacks] happened, in the same way we study how, kind doctors in another country, became able to kill mentally disabled, Jews, and persons who had Schizophrenia.

Breivik converted [or changed his religion, faith or belief,] to Nazism, while in prison, his lawyer Øystein Storrvik said in 2016.

The religious faith of Breivik, is Odinism. Previously, Breivik and others had linked his religious beliefs to Christianity: in 2011 he said that he was a Protestant, however in 2016 he said that he was not a Christian, and that never had he been a Christian.

Hours before the 2011 Norway attacks, Breivik e-mailed a copy of a compilation of text by various authors, and some text by Breivik.

In 2017, blogger and author "Fjordman" (real name: Peder Are Nøstvold Jensen) gave his opinion about texts written by Breivik (in the compilation and in letters from prison): Breivik appears to have psychiatric problems.

He has been diagnosed with personality disorders: antisocial and narcissistic, media said in 2012.

In 2012, his health was found to be good enough to be a defendant in a criminal trial, for the 2011 Norway attacks.


