Jerry Bruckheimer

Jerome Leon "Jerry" Bruckheimer (born September 21, 1945) is an American movie and television producer. He has achieved great success in the genres of action, drama, and science fiction. His best known television series are "", "", "", "Without a Trace", "Cold Case", and "The Amazing Race". Some of his best known movies include "Beverly Hills Cop", "Flashdance", "Top Gun", "The Rock", "Con Air", "Armageddon", "Bad Boys", "Enemy of the State", "Black Hawk Down", "Pearl Harbor", "Pirates of the Caribbean", and the "National Treasure" franchise. He is also one of the Board of Directors at ZeniMax Media.

Many of his movies were produced by Paramount and Disney. Many of his television series were co-produced by Warner Bros. and CBS Television Studios.

As of 2010, Bruckheimer has produced over 40 feature movies. He is regarded in the industry as one of the most successful movie producers of all time. Bruckheimer has been nicknamed "Mr. Blockbuster", due to his track record of commercially successful, high-grossing movies. Overall, his movies have brought in over $13 billion to Hollywood. They have also launched the careers of numerous actors and directors.

In 2007, he was ranked #39 on Forbes Celebrity 100 List, up from #42 in 2006. With reported annual earnings of $120 million,
he was the 10th highest money-earner on the 2006 Forbes Celebrity 100 List.

The editors of "Entertainment Weekly" named Bruckheimer the #1 most-powerful person in Hollywood in 2003. 

His projects have been honored with 41 Academy Award nominations (six wins), eight Grammy Award nominations (five wins), 23 Golden Globe nominations (four wins), 77 Emmy Award nominations (seventeen wins), eight People's Choice nominations (four wins), and numerous MTV Awards, including one for Best Picture of the Decade.

Bruckheimer received the ShoWest Producer of the Year Award in 1998 and in 2000 the Producers Guild honored him with the David O. Selznick Award for Lifetime Achievement.

Bruckheimer has been married twice. His first wife was Bonnie Bruckheimer. He currently lives in Los Angeles with his second wife, novelist Linda Bruckheimer. He also has one stepdaughter, Alexandra. The couple also owns a farm in Bloomfield, Kentucky, about southeast of Louisville. They also own another in Ojai, south of Santa Barbara. 

Bruckheimer has been named as one of the investors of a new sports arena in Las Vegas. He has been rumored to be the leading choice by the National Hockey League to own an expansion hockey team that would play in the proposed arena.








