Vicenza

Vicenza is a "comune" and city in the Veneto region, in Northeast Italy. Vicenza is the capital of the province of the same name. The city is about west of Venice, the capital of the region, and east of Milan.

Vicenza is a cosmopolitan city, with a rich history and culture, and many museums, art galleries, piazzas, villas, churches and elegant Renaissance "palazzi". With the "Palladian Villas of the Veneto" in the surrounding area, and his renowned "Teatro Olimpico" (Olympic Theater), Vicenza has been listed as an UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1994.

The city is also known as the "City of Palladio" after Andrea Palladio, an architect that designed and built several important buildings in Vicenza and other cities.

Vicenza is at the confluence of the "Bacchiglione" river with its tributary "Retrone".The "comune" of Vicenza has an area of to the north of the "Berici Hills". Its average altitude is .

The southern part of the city is flat with an elevation of above sea level. The historical centre is among the meanders of the Bacchiglione river and of its tributaries with an elevation of above sea level. To the south there is also an area with hills belonging to the Berici Hills with a top elevation of above sea level

Vicenza borders with the following "comuni"ː Altavilla Vicentina, Arcugnano, Bolzano Vicentino, Caldogno, Costabissara, Creazzo, Dueville, Longare, Monteviale, Monticello Conte Otto, Quinto Vicentino and Torri di Quartesolo.

The following "frazioni" (hamlets) are part of Vicenza: Anconetta, Bertesina, Bertesinella, Bugano, Campedello, Casale, Debba, Longara, Maddalene, Ospedaletto, Polegge, San Pietro Intrigogna, Santa Croce Bigolina, Tormeno.

The climate of Vicenza is an oceanic climate with template summers, Cfb (Marine West Coast Climate) in the Köppen climate classification.

The average temperature for the year in Vicenza is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Vicenza is . The month with the most precipitation on average is November with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is July with an average of .

, there are 112,953 persons living in the "comune", for a population density of inhabitants/km².
Evolution of the population in Vicenza

Vicenza is twinned with:



