Dassault Rafale

The Dassault Rafale is a fighter aircraft made by French airplane company Dassault Aviation. The prototype first flew in 1986 but was introduced in 2001 by the Marine Nationale. Rafale was introduced in Armée de l'Air in 2006.

Using the traditional delta wing of Dassault aircraft, the Rafale is a twin-engine fighter built in composite material and metal. Under the nose of the plane found a twin "canards" (in French in the text) wing used to stabilize the aircraft during certain phases of flight, especially at low altitude. The cockpit can be single or tandem seat, depending on aircraft type. The internal weapon consists of a 30 mm calibre machine gun. Rafale have got 13 or 14 hardpoints for external weapons : 
Maximum offensive load of the Rafale is 21 000 pounds (9 500 kg).

The Rafale avionics consists of an "RBE2" electronic scanning radar, the "OSF" passive visual system and "SPECTRA" electronic warfare. Under wings Rafale may take one or two pods of aerial reconnaissance. It uses the communication "Link 16" like as the majority of NATO combat aircraft.


In 2013 operational users of Rafale were: 

Early 2013 in France negotiating the sale of aircraft with Brazil, India, and UAE.

In the afghan war Armée de l'Air and Marine Nationale used there Rafale like bombers and reconnaissance planes. The main weapon of these aircraft was then laser guided bomb. French navy Rafale flown from French aircraft carrier "Charles de Gaulle", named like famous general and political man. Last French Rafale mission in Afghanistan was in december 2011.

In the war of 2011 French Rafale and Mirage 2000 bombed the armed forces of Colonel Gaddafi. Some comes from aircraft carrier "Charles de Gaulle" but French air forces aircraft were from Solenzara air force base in Corsica. In this kind aerial refuelling were an obligation. Like in Afghanistan French pilots fired laser guided bombs, but also laser guided missiles.

In january 2013 France launch in Mali the "opération Serval" whose objective is to fight the Islamist terrorists who occupy the north. Air and land French forces are on alert, and immediately the first French fighter jets launched night bombing. Some are Rafale, but also Mirage 2000D. Once French troops involved, including the Légion Étrangère and Special forces, Rafale and Mirage 2000 were used for close air support. French fighter jets operating from internation airport of N'Djamena in Chad.


