Emina Sandal

Emina Jahović Sandal (born 15 January 1982) is a well-known Serbian-Turkish singer-songwriter, model, and actress. 

She is of Bosniak origin and is married to Mustafa Sandal, the leading Turkish pop star.

Emina grew up in a Bosnian Muslim family in Novi Pazar, Serbia. Her brother is Mirsad Türkcan, the first Turkish basketball player to play in the NBA. She majored in Management at Braća Karić University in Belgrade.

She is 5'10" (178 cm) tall and is an official face of the Macedonian fashion label "Kara". She is quite popular across the entire area of former Yugoslavia and all around Eastern Europe. Emina is also known in Iran for her role in "Omre Gole Laleh" and is widely-recognized amongst the diaspora communities of the Former Yugoslavia in the United States.

Her sister-in-law is Dina Džanković, the last beauty queen to have the title of Miss Serbia and Montenegro.

She has two sons, Yaman (b. 2008) and Yavuz (2012).

In 2000, she won the youth festival Zlatna staza with the song "Samo ti, moja muziko". Her debut album "Tačka" was released in 2001 by Dino Merlin, the world-wide known artist.

In 2002, she participated in BH Eurosong with the song "U, la-la" and received an award at the Radio Festival in Sarajevo.

In 2003, she participated in the Sunčane Skale festival and won the third place with her song "Uzalud se budim". That made her one of the most popular artists in the former Yugoslav republics.

In 2005, she released her second album called "Radije ranije" through "City Records". In the 2005 Budvanski Festival she won the award for the best songwriter.

In 2008, Emina released her maxi single in English called "Exhale" in NYC. This album is produced by Bojan Dugić, the GRAMMY Awards voting member. Emina's 2008 video clip of "Još ti se nadam" is one of the most expensive music videos in Serbian music history.

In 2009, Emina Jahović's third studio album entitled "Vila" was released through PGP RTS.

In 2010, she was nominated to represent Serbia at the 2010 Eurovision Song Contest with the song "Ti kvariigro" that is composed by Goran Bregović for her.

She also performed in the 2013 Dosso Dossi Fashion Show on January 9, 2013 while Adriana Lima was on the runway.

Emina Jahović Sandal is known for resemblance to the Spanish actress Penélope Cruz.





