Subtropical Storm Nicole (2004)

Subtropical Storm Nicole was the fourteenth named storm and first subtropical cyclone to form during the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season. Additionally, it was the first subtropical storm to be given a name from the standard hurricane naming list and be considered a subtropical cyclone in real-time. The storm never made landfall as a subtropical cyclone, though its remnants affected Anticosti Island, just off of the provinces of Prince Edward Island and Quebec.

Nicole's genesis appeared to be associated with an upper tropospheric trough and a decaying frontal system located over the southwestern North Atlantic in early October. By October 8, a broad area of surface low pressure became evident about 400 miles (640 km) southeast of Bermuda. Shortly thereafter, the system began to produce gale-force winds, affecting Bermuda on October 9. Early the next day, analysis from the National Hurricane Center determined that the low-pressure system had acquired sufficient tropical characteristics to be classified as a subtropical storm, whereupon it was assigned the name "Nicole".

Steadily tracking over cooler waters toward the northwest, Nicole lost all of its tropical characteristics and was declared fully extratropical on October 11, 345 miles (555 km) south-southeast of Halifax, Nova Scotia. The Canadian Hurricane Centre continued to issue advisories on what was referred to as "Post-tropical Storm Nicole", which had subsequently merged with a stronger mid-latitude cyclone. The resultant weather system producing heavy rainfall across the Maritimes in the vicinity of Anticosti Island on October 14.

No damage or fatalities were reported, for that Nicole never made landfall or directly affected any land areas. It brought light rain to Bermuda and briefly threatened it before heading northeast. Its remnants combined with a stronger cyclone affecting Anticosti Island in Canada; however, no significant damage was caused in the area.

Since 2002, subtropical storms have been assigned names from the same naming sequence as tropical storms. As such, Nicole was the first named subtropical storm to receive a name under this rule. Many subtropical cyclones between 1975 and 2001 with a sufficiently tropical nature were either considered fully tropical storms or numbered. Initially, however, the phonetic alphabet was used to name subtropical cyclones.


For official forecasts, see the NHC's public advisory archive on Subtropical Storm Nicole.



