Antônio Carlos Jobim

Antônio Carlos Jobim (January 25, 1927 – December 8, 1994) was a Brazilian musician of the 20th century. He was a songwriter, composer, singer, and pianist/guitarist. He and João Gilberto developed bossa nova as a genre of music. He is a co-creator of bossa nova. He is widely known as the composer of "The girl from Ipanema". The representative album "Wave" counts among his major works. Besides, He created much great bossa nova music. His songs have been performed by many singers and instrumentalists and loved by people.

Antônio Carlos Jobim was born in the Tijuca, in Rio de Janeiro. He came from a prominent family. After his parents separated, he was raised in Ipanema. At the age of ten, he started to play piano and compose. His life as a musician began at the age of 20. As a 20-year-old, Jobim earned his living by playing in night clubs before achieving success.

Jobim made his name as a musician when he teamed up with poet and diplomat Vinícius de Moraes to write the music for the play "Orfeu de Conceição" (1956). That time, A Felicidade, Frevo, and Nosso Amor were composed. A key event in making Jobim's music known in the world was his collaboration with saxophonist Stan Getz, João Gilberto. Especially Jobim wrote many of the songs with Getz/Gilberto, which became one of the best-selling jazz albums of all time.

His songs "The Girl from Ipanema" and "Corcovado" also became sensations. Getz/Gilberto won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year. "The Girl from Ipanema" won the Grammy Award for Record of the Year in 1965.

Jobim is one of the most important songwriters of the 20th century. Jobim's song has sophisticated harmonic structures. Some of his melodic twists, like the melody insisting on the major seventh of the chord, became common use in jazz and easy listening music after him.

As Brazilians have loved him so much, the Municipality of Rio de Janeiro changed the name of Rio's Galeão International Airport to Galeão - Antônio Carlos Jobim Airport.


