LionsXII

LionsXII is a Singapore football team based at Jalan Besar Stadium. Managed by the Football Association of Singapore, the squad marks the return of Singapore to the Malaysia football scene after leaving the Malaysia Cup in 1994. The name "LionsXII" is a special tribute to the fans, who is generally recognised as football's "12th Man".

In 2011, the Football Association of Singapore and the Football Association of Malaysia reached an agreement that would see greater cooperation between the two nations. One of the intended avenues would see the Under-23s play in the Malaysian Super League and Malaysia Cup from 2012 onwards, the first time a Singaporean team would be participating in Malaysian domestic football since 1994, when Singapore won the M-League and Malaysia Cup double. Although the new Singapore team would have the existing Under-23s forming its core, senior players were also called upon to guide the younger players. No foreign players were allowed to be part of the Singapore team as this project served as being developmental.

The LionsXII debuted in the 2012 Malaysia Super League on 10 January 2012 with a 1–2 loss to defending champions Kelantan FA. The LionsXII's first win was a 2–1 victory over Kuala Lumpur FA on 17 January. The LionsXII's first away win was a 1–0 victory over Sabah FA on 21 January. LionsXII began their 2012 Malaysia FA Cup quest on 18 February, with a 3–0 win over UiTM FC. The LionsXII made their way to the quarter-final with a 2–0 win over Betaria FC on 10 March 2012. However, they were beaten by Terengganu FA in the quarter-finals. On 16 June 2012, they defeated Sabah FA 9–0 at home, the biggest win in the MSL season. LionsXII finished second in the league behind Kelantan FA, and bowed out of the semi-final of the 2012 Malaysia Cup after losing in a penalty shoot-out against ATM FA.

LionsXII were set a target of finishing in the top top five for the 2013 Malaysia Super League when a press conference was held before the start of the season. The five overage players included key members from the previous campaign such as Shahril Ishak, Isa Halim, and Baihakki Khaizan, but other key players such as Shahdan Sulaiman and Shaiful Esah no longer featured. The main aim was to develop the U-23 players and prepare them for the upcoming 2013 Southeast Asian Games that would be held at the end of the year, with the five seniors players serving to guide them throughout the campaign. As at the start of the campaign, 13 players were also undergoing National Service.

LionsXII began their campaign by defeating ATM FA 1–0 away. In their first home match, they successfully edged out traditional rivals Selangor FA for the first time since joining the MSL. However, LionsXII stumbled to two losses against lowly T-Team FC and PKNS FC away. They also crashed out against in the first round of the 2013 Malaysia FA Cup against PKNS. Despite this, LionsXII went on a long unbeaten streak, securing important wins over Pahang FA (3–0), Kelantan FA (1–0), and ATM FA (3–1) at home. The opposing coaches even conceded the title to the LionsXII leading up to the end of the season, as the team chalked up the best home record in the league, winning 10 and drawing one (with the draw coming in Round 19 against title-contender Johor Darul Takzim FC.

On 2 July 2013, a 4–0 win over relegation-threatened FELDA United FC in the penultimate league game made LionsXII league champions. Singapore's Prime Minister, Lee Hsien Loong was present for the match played in front of a sold-out crowd at the Jalan Besar Stadium. The MSL trophy was also brought to Jalan Besar Stadium as the LionsXII received it on home soil after the final whistle. LionsXII became the first foreign team to win the MSL, adding to the four Malaysian league titles it had won in 1979, 1981, 1985, and 1994. The title run was defined by a combination of good defence (13 goals conceded, the best record in the MSL) and goals from set-pieces (17 out of 32).

LionsXII ground stadium is Jalan Besar Stadium in Singapore. The stadium can host 8,000 supporters in total.

On 30 October 2012, a new high-definition LED scoreboard was implemented at the Gallery to provide better quality to the spectators as it will be able replay video highlights of the action on the field.

LionsXII boasts a lot of passionate supporters who will always turn up in red to support them in every home match. Their official fan group is called ExcluSinga accredited by the Football Association of Singapore. The group was formed from their news-providing Facebook page, Exclusive Singapore LIONSXII, which provides regular and exclusive updates which recognised by the Football Association of Singapore and has become their official fan club in April 2012 soon after the LionsXII was formed on 25 March 2012.

Members of ExcluSinga will make their appearances in LionsXII matches chanting and supporting the team throughout the whole 90 minutes.

They have over 1,000 members in their Facebook group up to date.

On 5 January 2012, Football Association of Singapore announced the appointment of StarHub as the Official Broadcaster and Principal Sponsor of LionsXII. As part of the partnership, StarHub will carry all LionsXII content on its pay TV, online and mobile platforms. Two days after the announcement of the kit, LionsXII sealed a second major sponsorship deal, with news that SilkPro will fund the Singapore outfit to the tune of S$1m during its debut season in Malaysia Super League. On 23 February 2012, LionsXII secured another sponsorship deal, with Shop N Save, a Singapore supermarket, coming on board as the 'Official Supermarket' for the Singapore outfit in its debut season in the Malaysian Super League.

"Updated on 3 July 2013"

Updated on 1 May 2013

Malaysia Super League<br>
Total goals scored: 32 <br>
Total goals conceded: 13

Malaysia FA Cup<br>
Total goals scored: 0 <br>
Total goals conceded: 1


