The Suite Life on Deck

The Suite Life on Deck is a television series on Disney Channel. It premiered on September 26, 2008. It is a sequel to "The Suite Life of Zack and Cody". The series is about twin brothers Zack and Cody Martin and hotel heiress London Tipton in a new setting, the SS "Tipton". The group goes to classes at a school on the boat that is called "Seven Seas High". On the boat, they meet Bailey Pickett. Mr. Moseby manages the ship. The ship travels around the world to nations such as Italy, Greece, India, Sweden and the United Kingdom In the places where the ship travels, the characters experience different cultures, adventures, and situations.









The show's first episode premiered on the Disney Channel in the US on September 26, 2008. Around 5.7 million people watched it on the night of its premiere.. The series premiere in Canada was also the most watched series premiere on Family channel. In December 2008, Business Wire reported that the show was 2008's #1 scripted television series for children between the ages 6 to 11 and older children between the ages 9 to 14, beating the older series "Hannah Montana" and "Wizards of Waverly Place" in the ratings.<ref name="Disney Channel/DisneyChannel.com Highlights For 2008"></ref> The show was in the #1 spot for the best rated children's television series for many months. The show has been one of the best 4 live-action television series for many months. Since then, “The Suite Life on Deck” had a large lead in the time slot (Friday 8:00 p.m.), ranking as TV's #1 program among the important children's age groups. The series is also #1 in total viewers on all cable, doing better than #2 rank (Fox News and Nickelodeon) by 800,000 more viewers.

As of August 2009, the highest rated episode of "The Suite Life on Deck" was "Double-Crossed," the second part of "Wizards On Deck with Hannah Montana", three episodes where guest stars from "Wizards of Waverly Place" and "Hannah Montana" came onto the show. It premiered on July 17, 2009 on Disney Channel. The special episode was viewed by more than 10.6 million people. It is one of the highest-rated episodes for a Disney Channel original series.

In early October 2009, the one hour special episode "Lost at Sea" became the most watched episode of the series. It had 7.6 million total viewers. In 2009, the series was the most watched scripted series in the children and older children group of viewers (6-14). The series second season's ratings were 25% higher than the show's season one ratings. The second season has averaged around 5.1 million viewers.

Before the series officially started airing, the first episode named "The Suite Life Sets Sail" was made available as a free download on iTunes. All series have since been made available.


