Die Deutschen Inschriften

The Academies of Sciences in Mainz and Göttingen planed and carried the project "Deutsche Inschriften Online" (English: German Inscriptions Online) out. The project's ambition was to digitalize the volumes DI 66/45/56/58/61 and make them available online. The realisation is based on a database who was developed by the Inscription-offices in Greifswald and Mainz. The venture has an innovative character. It is seeing itself as a broadening of the project "Inschriften Mittelrhein-Hunsrück (IMH)" (English: Inscriptions of the Middlerhine-Hunsrück). The IMH-Project was worked out in 2008. The "Institut für Geschichtliche Landeskunde an der Universität Mainz" (English: Institute for Regional History at the University of Mainz) took part in working out the IMH-Project. The project digitalized the volume "Die Inschriften des Rhein-Hunsrück Kreises I (DI 60)" (English: The Inscriptions of the Rhine-Hunsrück District) edited by epigraphist Eberhard J. Nikitsch. In the meantime the website of the IMH-Project has merged into the DIO-Web portal. In the long run digitalization and making available online of further volumes is scheduled. Also a translation of the DIO-Website into the English language is projected.

Besides the digitalized volumes DIO features an elaborated search interface, news concerning epigraphy and series of articles. The series featured are "Epigraphischer Tipp" (English: Epigraphical Hint) and "Inschrift im Fokus" (English: Focused on Inscription). There are also a glossary and a list of topical weblinks. Additionally the site presents a wide array of photographs and pictures of inscriptions or things alike. By this means the publishers try to interweave different alternatives of presenting information to the public.

Today twelve volumes including more than 4170 items and more than 4000 illustrations and photographs can be retrieved by the user. Currently online available are the volumes DI-19 Göttingen (City), DI-28 Hameln, DI-36 Hannover, DI-42 Einbeck, DI-45 Goslar, DI-56 Braunschweig, DI-58 Hildesheim, DI-60 Rhein-Hunsrück-Kreis I, DI-61 Helmstedt, DI-66 Göttingen (District), DI-46 Minden, The Inscriptions of the City of Mainz. First Part: The Inscriptions of the Cathedral and the Museum of Cathedral and Diocese ranging from 800 to 1350.




