Dehydration

Dehydration (hypohydration) means less water in something. The word comes from the ancient Greek word for water, "hydor". 

People get dehydrated when they lose more water than they take in. The human body needs water to survive. If a person gets badly dehydrated, their body will be unable to work the right way. Bad dehydration can cause organ damage and even death. 

A person will get dehydrated if their body is losing water in some way and they do not drink enough to replace the water the body is losing. The most common causes of dehydration are: 

Anyone can get dehydrated. However, some people are more at risk for dehydration. (This means that they get dehydrated more easily than most people.) Elderly people, very young children, and people with chronic illnesses are at the highest risk for dehydration. 

Dehydrated people may have different symptoms depending on how dehydrated they are. If dehydration is not treated, it will get worse. As dehydration gets worse, the symptoms get more dangerous.

When people start to get dehydrated, they may have these symptoms: 

When dehydration gets severe (very bad), its symptoms include: 

Severe dehydration is a medical emergency. If a person with severe dehydration does not get medical treatment soon enough, they can die.

Bad dehydration can cause serious health problems. Some of these problems are:

To fix dehydration, a person has to replace the fluids and electrolytes that they have lost. 

When dehydration is not too bad, people can usually treat themselves by drinking. This is called oral rehydration therapy. Stores sell special drinks like Pedialyte and Gatorade, which have both water and electrolytes in them. People can also make their own oral rehydration solution (a drink which treats dehydration) by mixing water with sugar and salt.

People with very bad dehydration need emergency medical treatment. They may need to get fluids intravenously (through a needle placed into a vein). This replaces lost fluids and electrolytes much more quickly than drinking. It is also helpful for people who are unable to drink because of nausea and vomiting from dehydration. 


