United States presidential election, 2016

The 2016 election for President of the United States took place on Tuesday, November 8, 2016. On that day, voters had elected the 45th President and the 48th Vice President of the United States. Former president Barack Obama was unable to seek re-election for a third term according to the Twenty-second Amendment to the United States Constitution. 

After the election, Donald Trump was named President-elect of the United States while his running mate Mike Pence was named Vice President-elect of the United States. Trump received 304 electoral votes, 34 more votes than what was needed to win, while Clinton received 227. Even though Clinton won the popular vote, the electoral votes decide the actual winner of the election. Trump took office on January 20, 2017.

 of the United States Constitution provides that for a person to be elected and serve as President of the United States, the individual must be a natural-born citizen of the United States, at least 35 years old, and a resident of the United States for a period of no less than 14 years. 

Candidates for the presidency typically seek the nomination of one of the various political parties of the United States, in which case each party devises a method (such as a primary election) to choose the candidate the party deems best suited to run for the position. The party's delegates then officially nominate a candidate to run on the party's behalf.

Ballot access to 493(451) electoral votes: Ballot access currently in process: North Dakota, Rhode Island, Wyoming

States currently under litigation for ballot access: Nevada, Oklahoma

States with no ballot access: South Dakota As "write-in": 

Ballot access to all 538 electoral votes











Battleground states during the election were: Nevada, Georgia, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Florida, New Hampshire, Maine, Ohio and North Carolina. Trump won Georgia, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Ohio, North Carolina, Florida and a congressional district in Maine. Clinton won Nevada, New Hampshire and Maine. Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania were seen as likely 'Blue' states, but Trump won all three states in what was seen as a political upset.







On April 1, 2015, the Commission on Presidential Debates a (CPD) announced that each of the following 16 locations are under consideration to host one of the three presidential debates and one vice presidential debate:

The three locations which will host the presidential debates and the one location selected to host the vice presidential debate are to be announced by the CPD in the fall of 2015.



