Lincoln (movie)

Lincoln is a 2012 biographical war drama movie that is based on events during the life of the 16th United States President Abraham Lincoln. The movie was made by Disney's Touchstone label, Dreamworks, and 20th Century Fox. The movie is based on Doris Kearns Goodwin's book .

"Lincoln" tells about President Abraham Lincoln during January 1865, in his efforts to pass the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution in the United States House of Representatives, which would finally ban slavery in the country. Expecting the Civil War to end within a month but concerned that his 1863 Emancipation Proclamation may be rejected by the courts once the war has stopped and the 13th Amendment defeated by the returning slave states. President Lincoln seeks help from his cabinet including the founder of the Republican Party Francis Preston Blair who can help congress vote yes on stopping slavery. As he talks about the Democrats saying no, Lincoln talks to Secretary of State William H. Seward about the problem of Democrats. As Thaddeus Stevens convinces the congress to vote yes on abolishing slavery, Union Army General Ulysses S. Grant received a surrender from Confederate General Robert E. Lee. Later on April 14, 1865, Lincoln has a final meeting with his cabinet and prepares to go to a play with his wife Mary Todd Lincoln. The movie ends when Lincoln's son receives the news that his father died after being shot at Ford's Theater. As the movie ends it shows flashbacks of Lincoln's second inaugural address.


As of November 22, 2012, the movie has made $32,291,000 from 1,775 theaters. The movie opened at 11 theaters with $944,308 and an average of $85,846 per theater. It opened at the #15 rank, becoming the highest opening of a movie with such a limited release.

The movie was nominated for seven Golden Globe Awards including: Best Musical Score for John Williams, Best Supporting Actor Tommy Lee Jones, Best Supporting Actress for Sally Field, Best Screenplay for Tony Kushner, Best Director Steven Spielberg, and Best Movie. The movie only won one Golden Globe, given to Daniel Day-Lewis for Best Leading Actor.

The movie was nominated for four Screen Actors Guild Awards including: Best Crew in a Motion Picture, Best Female Actor in a Supporting Role for Sally Field. It won two for Best Supporting Actor for Tommy Lee Jones and Best Male Actor in a Leading Role for Daniel Day-Lewis.

The movie was nominated for 12 Academy Awards some of them includes: Best Supporting Actor, Best Supporting Actress, Best Cinematography, Best Sound Mixing, Best Costume Design, Best Film Editing, Best Original Score. Lincoln won the Academy Award for Best Production Design to Rick Carter and Jim Ericson.

"Lincoln" was released on Blu-ray, DVD, and digital download on March 26, 2013 from Touchstone Home Entertainment. The release was produced in two different physical packages: a 2-disc combo pack (Blu-ray and DVD); and a 1-disc DVD.



