Ratibořské Hory

Ratibořské Hory is a village and municipality. It is in the Tábor District in the South Bohemian Region of the Czech Republic.

The municipality is . As of 2 October 2006, there were 747 people living there.

Village Ratibořské Hory is 9 miles northeast of Tabor in the direction of Kutna Hora.

The village currently has about 740 inhabitants and consists of five parts - Ratibořské Hory, Vresce, Dub, Podoli and Ratiborice. There already begins Moravian Highlands with the occurrence of minerals and ores containing silver.

In 1526 King Louis Jagelonsky granted brothers Medencum of Ratiborice and Podoli right to extract minerals in a half miles in circumference around Ratiborice. The king reserved the preferential right to purchase precious metals, gold and lot for two stacks and talent of silver for three and a half stack.

This privilege started extensive mining activity area Ratiborice, which enriched the local landscape of picturesque islands heaps especially with forest vegetation. It is these heaps, vivid evidence of mining, are a wonderful adornment of the landscape, we can observe the dominant height, from Adam's Hill, whose summit is at an altitude of 611 meters, or from the top of the loaf, which is above the natural park Polanka and its altitude is 666 m.

Through this cycle, called the results "silver eight" that showcases the very beautiful natural scenery with twelve ponds that are surrounded by meadow vegetation in protected plants - such as "Menyanthes trifoliata" which is an herb that has known its share in it drink, which has a great success both at home and abroad and is known for Becherovka.
From cultural attractions dominate renovated churches St. Bartholomew in Ratiborice and St. Adalbert in Ratiborske Hory.

The development of the municipality contributes to school, post office, health center, public library, grocery store and last but not least, the local association Sokol, volunteer firefighters, SK Ratiborske Hory and hunting associations.

Tourists, who can also use the regular bus lines from the district town, offering a pleasant rest and two restaurants on the square of Ratiborske Hory.

The town Ratibořské Hory (Bergstadtl), founded four hundred eighty years ago in the northeast of Tabor, was for several centuries dependent on mining.
The boom in mining caused a much greater concentration of population in Ratibořské Hory than the corresponding options of agricultural production in the town and its surroundings.

Fundamental change in character fit in well with the renewal of mining in the district of Ratiborice sometime early 16 century. Already from 1515, was preserved record of the smelting of silver ore from Ratiborice and Vresce in Rosenberg's steelworks in the Czech Krumlov. The Rosenbergs invested in these mines large amounts of money, called the new professionals who are in Ratibořice Mountains focused primarily on large construction pit the Three Kings. At that time Ratibořské Hory with the surroundings at the peak of its prosperity, which was mined today in nearly all known mines.


