TLC

TLC are an American girl group. It originally had three members, but it is now a duo. TLC were one of the first R&B and hip hop stars of the 1990s. They formed the band in Atlanta, Georgia in 1991. TLC (an acronym for "T-Boz, Left Eye and Chilli") consisted of Tionne "T-Boz" Watkins, Lisa "Left Eye" Lopes (1971-2002) and Rozonda "Chilli" Thomas. Lisa Pebbles, was the band manager. 

TLC's debut album "Ooooooohhh... On the TLC Tip" (1992) sold 4,000,000 copies in the United States. It released four singles "Ain't 2 Proud 2 Beg", "What About Your Friends", "Hat 2 Da Back", and "Baby, Baby, Baby". In 1994, band member Lopes had set her boyfriend, Andre Rison's, house on fire. After she was released from rehab, she was put on probation. That same year, "CrazySexyCool" was released. It became their breakthrough release. It sold 11,000,000 copies in the United States and was certified 8x Platinum in Canada, Platinum in United Kingdom and 1x Diamond in the United States. "Rolling Stone" magazine ranked the album #377 of the "500 greatest albums of all time" list. The singles "Red Light Special", "Waterfalls", "Creep" and "Diggin' on You" all entered the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart.

TLC filed for bankruptcy in 1995, despite their success of "CrazySexyCool". The band had owe too much money to their manager Pebbles. The albums sales were not enough to pay her back. TLC filed for a lawyer and was able to terminate the record deal signed with Pebbles. Because of the label and producer trouble, and health problems (Watkins' struggled with sickle cell anemia), postponed any developments for their next album. "Fanmail" was released in 1999. The album became a hit record. The singles "No Scrubs", "Unpretty", and "Silly Ho" helped the album to reach #1 on the "Billboard" 200 pop chart. The album's fourth single "Dear Lie" was not successful. The album was given positive feedback from music critics. The band began arguing with each other because of Lopes, who continued to be on tabloid magazines. Watkins married Mack 10, a rapper. However, her health problems were helping her to not be near recording studios. Lopes had begun a solo career. In 2002, Lopes was killed during a car accident in Honduras. The remainder of the group announced that they continue recording their fourth album. Lopes had recorded a few verses before she was killed.

The album, "3D" was released later that year. The single "Girl Talk" was a tribute to Lopes. The other single "Hands Up" was not successful. The album's third single "Damaged" was more successful and was on the Hot 100 until 2003. In 2004, the reality television show "R U The Girl?" aired on FOX. The show was about searching for great African American singers. The show had over 4,000,000 average viewers. O'so Krispie from Atlanta was chosen as the winner. TLC later said that they never wanted to replace Lopes and disbanded the group.

In July 2013 TLC signed a new record contract. TLC will start a tour in 2014.




