Condom, Gers

Condom (), also called Condom-en-Armagnac or Condom-sur-Baïse, is a commune in southwestern France in the department of Gers, Occitanie region, of which it is a subprefecture.

Despite their similar names, the condom was neither invented nor developed in the "commune" of Condom.

The name "Condom" comes from the Gaulish (an ancient Celtic language spoken in parts of Europe) words "condate-ó-magos" which means "market of the confluence". "Condatómagos" evolved into "Condatóm" and then into "Conddóm". "Condom" was first recorded in Latin in the 10th century as "Condomus" or "Condomium".

After the colonization of the area by the Romans, the Abbey of Saint Pierre was built in 1011. During the Hundred Years' War, the city was taken twice by the English. The Saint Pierre Cathedral was begun in 1507.

Condom is a town on the "Via Podiensis" (the "Le Puy Route"), one of the three major French pilgrimage routes of the Way of St. James. This particular route begins in Le Puy and ends in Santiago de Compostela in northwest Spain. Pilgrims came to Condom from Miradoux and continue on to Larressingle.

Condom is a "commune" found along the Baïse river, between Armagnac and Agenais. Condom is the main town of the "Condomès" or "Ténarèze" region.

The "commune" has an area of and its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is ..

Condom is surrounded by the "communes":

The climate of Condom, in the Köppen climate classification, is Cfb - Oceanic climate with template summers.

The inhabitants of Condom are known, in French, as "Condomois" (women: "Condomoises").

With a population of 6,835 (2014), Condom has a population density of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Condom

The "commune" of Condom depends mainly of the agriculture, the tourism and the trade.

Important agricultural products are Armagnac (an alcoholic beverage like a brandy), "Floc de Gascogne" (a regional apéritif) and "foie gras".

Some of places of interest are:

Condom is twinned with:




