List of Total Drama episodes

This article contains a list of all the episodes to the "Total Drama" series in the American cable television channel, Cartoon Network. This series currently consists of six seasons: Every season each consists of 27 episodes although a special episode is sometimes added as a transition from two seasons to another, except for the third season which you only has 26 episodes and for the fourth season which only has 14 episodes and for the fifth and sixth season which only has 13 episodes. In the Cartoon Network release, in the beginning of each episode, Chris McLean narrates a voice introduction with a written disclaimer as follows: ""This episode of Total Drama contains scenes of extreme stunts performed by animated teens. Do not try any of what you see here at home. Seriously, you could get really messed up."" and laughs. In the United States, Cartoon Network creates a disclaimer with a TV-PG-D rating before the previous show's recap. The episodes in the series are listed and ordered in their original American titles and numbers.

Source for table:

Key:

This is a brief summary displaying all the airdates by month for the entire "Total Drama" series throughout the years.
The series is only designed to have one commercial break on every episode; this is seen by the episode fading in and fading out at the middle of each episode, while Chris (or Geoff in the Aftermath episodes) says a line (like ""We'll be right back!"", for example) right before the screen fades. Originally, Teletoon has a commercial break on this fade, but as for Cartoon Network, they have two or sometimes three commercial breaks on each episode, resulting in an edit-out and interrupting the main plot of that episode. One example is when a contestant, or a team, wins a certain challenge, and then all of a sudden, the screen fades and a commercial pops out. Usually, Chris is supposed to warn the viewers that a commercial break is coming, and says so before the fade-in. However, this scene is only shown on the middle of each episode, which is a perfect place for a commercial break for Teletoon, but not on Cartoon Network. On the other hand when the show airs in Australia on ABC3 there is no commercial break (as the ABC is funded by the Australian government and not by commercials) so when there would be a commercial break the screen similly fade out out and then after 2 second fade in again.

In almost every episode, there is an elimination. The tables below display all the ranks and eliminations of all the contestants throughout the entire series.



