G-spot

The Gräfenberg spot (usually called G-spot) is defined as a highly sensitive area near the entrance inside of the human vagina. It is believed to be a part of the urethal sponge. Some people believe it is a bundle of nerves in the female human reproductive system. If the area is stimulated, this can cause pleasurable sensations, female ejaculation and a strong orgasm in some women. Some doctors and researchers who specialize in the anatomy of women say that there is no anatomical evidence for the "spot".

The "G-spot" concept was named by Addiego and others in 1981 or by Beverly Whipple and others in 1982. It is named after the German gynaecologist, Ernst Gräfenberg. Gräfenberg wrote first about "The Role of Urethra in Female Orgasm" in 1950. A book was first published about the G-spot in 1982, called "The G Spot and Other Recent Discoveries About Human Sexuality" by three authors from the United States: Alice Kahn Ladas, a psychologist; Beverly Whipple, a registered nurse and sex counselor; and John D. Perry, a psychologist.

Although typically described as near the entrance inside of the vagina, reports of the G-spot's location vary and therefore it has no specific place to be found. However, there are two methods which are used to find it:

Some women say that they have "deeper" orgasms when the G-spot is stimulated. One research team experimented with the vagina by trying to touch the G-spot in certain places under experimental conditions; they found that in most cases, women had a sensitive area near the front of the vagina.

Some people, including doctors, do not believe that the G-spot exists. When the book "The G Spot and Other Recent Discoveries About Human Sexuality" was published in 1982, there was significant criticism. Some people who are not doctors simply say that it is a "highly sensitive area" in the vagina.

Scientists have carried out tests trying to find the G-spot and have not found any consistent or definitive evidence of it, and most of them believe that, if it does exist, it is an extension of the clitoris.



