I Could Fall in Love

"I Could Fall in Love" is a song by American Tejano singer Selena. It was written and produced by Keith Thomas. It was for Selena's fifth album "Dreaming of You" (1995). The song's lyrics are about a woman who loves a guy. She is scared of rejection so she decides not to tell him and keeps it to herself. 

It was released in the United States on June 26, 1995 as a promotional recording and not as a CD single. Because of this, it was not eligible for the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart. The song was released three months after Selena was killed by her friend and ex-employer of her clothing stores, Yolanda Saldivar. "I Could Fall in Love" reached number eight on the US Hot 100 Airplay chart. It reached number one in Canada and the US Latin Pop Airplay chart. "I Could Fall in Love" had also reached many other positions on other charts.

Helped by heavy rotation, "I Could Fall in Love" became Selena's most famous songs. It also helped her gain English speaking fans. Many "American Idol" contestants have covered the song. Puerto Rican singer and actress, Jennifer Lopez have covered the song as a tribute to Selena during one of her concerts. Cuban singer, Gloria Estefan have covered the song during the "Selena ¡VIVE!" concert held on April 9, 2005.

Selena, and her brother A.B. Quintanilla III, went to Nashville, Tennessee to see Keith Thomas. Thomas is a music producer and a songwriter who has worked with Amy Grant before. Thomas had introduced himself to both Selena and A.B. He explained to them that he did not add any vocals to the song called "I Could Fall in Love". The vocals in a song help singers learn the lyrics quicker. Thomas began singing the introduction of "I Could Fall in Love". At that moment, Selena and A.B. had wanted the song to be included in Selena's crossover album. Thomas had given Selena the lyrics so she can memorize it for her recording session. In December 1994, Selena went back to Nashville by herself on a plane. She recorded "I Could Fall in Love" that day. Thomas later told "Biography", that "all eyes were on her". He also said that Selena had no "ego" problems and was "down to-Earth" (a person who keeps a positive attitude and always acts nice to everyone).

"I Could Fall in Love" is a contemporary R&B, soul and a power ballad. The song is about a women who loves a guy. She is scared to be rejected by him. Because of this, she decides not to tell him. It is composed in C minor with 157 beats per minute. The electronic keyboards, Spanish guitar, and the drums is the song's background music. Selena uses the soprano voice. She has a light-deep voice and uses her emotional voice when she sings the title of the song. Trey Lorenz is the backing vocalist. After Selena sings the chorus, she sings in Spanish during the down-tempo part of the song. She goes back to singing in English. At the end of the song, she uses the melisma technique and hits a high F note.

"I Could Fall in Love" was released as a promotional recording on June 26, 1995 and to radio stations on June 15. It soon became a hit single across the United States. "I Could Fall in Love" had dominated the Top 40 radio stations. It also had heavy rotation in Southern United States. "I Could Fall in Love" became the most played song in Kansas City, Miami, and Boston, while it was the second-most played song in Los Angeles. It was played on radio stations in Tucson, Arizona every 2½ hours.

In 1996, "I Could Fall in Love" won the Tejano Crossover Song of the Year at the 16th Tejano Music Awards. In 1997, Thomas won the "Among Most Played Song" award at the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers for "I Could Fall in Love". Selena's three top-five singles, including "I Could Fall in Love", made her runner-up to Shania Twain on UU-BRU Radio Playlists "Top Female Act of the Year" in 1995. The songs "Dreaming of You" and "I Could Fall in Love" were EMI Records' top selling digital downloads from April 1, 2004 to March 31, 2005.

"I Could Fall in Love" was given positive reviews from music critics. Mario Tarrradell of "The Dallas Morning News" wrote that "I Could Fall in Love" reminded him of songs recorded by TLC and Brandy Norwood. A "San Jose Mercury News" writer believed "I Could Fall in Love" and "Dreaming of You" helped Selena to become the new "Gloria Estefan". Richard Torres of "Newsday" believed "I Could Fall in Love" and "Dreaming of You" became romantic anthems. According to James Hunter of "Vibe" magazine, "I Could Fall in Love" is a "masterpiece". On March 31, 2010, Teresa Jusino of Popmatters wrote that English-speaking music fans no longer knows Selena's name. She also said that if you played "Dreaming of You" or "I Could Fall in Love", they will most likely say "I remember that song!" or "I love that one!". "I Could Fall in Love" became a popular wedding song after its release. It also became one of Selena's most famous songs. It helped her gain English language speaking fans.

The music video for "I Could Fall in Love" was released in August 1995. It features pictures and videos of Selena. The music video reached number 11 on the "Billboard" Video Monitor VH1 Top Music Videos list. It also reached number six on The BOX Video List, number 10 on the MOR Music list, and number 3 on the California Music Channel (CMC).

In 2001, Jennifer Lopez covered the song during her Lets Get Loud Tour in Puerto Rico. During the "Selena ¡VIVE!" (2005) concert, Cuban singer Gloria Estefan covered the song. Puerto Rican singer Ana recorded the song on her album "Amor Latino". "American Idol" contestants have covered the song. They include, Lisa Leuschner (season 3) and Karen Rodriguez (season 10). Korean singer Im Tae Kyung have recorded the song on his album "Sentimental Journey". Reggae singer Fiona had also recorded the song on her album "Best of Sweet Love". American R&B singer Ali-Ollie Woodson recorded the song on his album "Love At the Same Time". Filipino singer Ivy Violan recorded the song for her album "Ivy Silver Series". American singer Blake Cardenas recorded the song on his debut album "Born Ready".

American singer and actress Keke Palmer had done an acoustic version of the song on her YouTube account. Snooki, from the American reality television series "Jersey Shore", lip sync the song on her YouTube account.

"I Could Fall in Love" reached number eight on the US Hot 100 Airplay. It also reached to number two for five weeks on the Hot Latin Tracks. "I Could Fall in Love" became the highest ranking English language song on the Hot Latin Tracks for two years. The song "My Heart Will Go On" by Celine Dion surpassed it in 1998 when it peaked at number one. It reached number four on the Latin Tropical/Salsa Airplay and number five on both the Latin Regional Mexican Airplay. The song reached number one on the Latin Pop Airplay chart. "I Could Fall in Love" reached number 17 on the Adult Top 40 chart. The song peaked at number three on the Hot 100 Recurrent Airplay chart. It also peaked at number six on the Hot Adult Contemporary Recurrent chart. On the Rhythmic Top 40, it reached number six and on number 15 on the Top 40 Mainstream chart.

In New Zealand, "I Could Fall in Love" debuted at number 36 on the New Zealand Top 40 chart. On the fifth week while being on the chart, "I Could Fall in Love" reached number ten. Selena became the first and only Tejano singer to have one of her songs be played in that country. In Canada, "I Could Fall in Love" debuted at number 55 on the Adult Contemporary chart. It reached number one on November 6, 1995. The song debuted at number 94 on the Top Singles chart. On the eleventh week while being on the chart, it reached number ten. It remained there for two weeks at number ten. "I Could Fall in Love" peaked at number 37 on the Tokyo Hot 100.



Credits from "Dreaming of You".



