Ronnie Radke

Ronald Joseph Radke (born December 15, 1983 in Las Vegas, Nevada) is an American singer. He was the founder and singer in the band Escape the Fate from 2004 to 2008. As of december 2008, he is the founder and singer in the band Falling in Reverse.

Ronald Joseph Radke was born on December 15, 1983 at Saint Rows Hospital, Las Vegas, Nevada. He has Native American ancestry. His mother left him at a very young age. He later met her. She was a dog groomer but she later left his life and was an addict. He was raised by his father who also had a drug problem but later became a born again Christian and became sober and soon became a president of a motorcycle club. Growing up, Radke was very poor. In high school, focusing was a struggle for Radke as he often wore girls' jeans with his friend Mich because of the skateboarders he liked and he can still ride to this day. Ronald said he got them mostly from girls' houses. In high school, he was bullied by the kids for his unique style of wearing tight clothes and very small shirts but he often got along with some because of his interest in rapping. Radke dropped out of high school twice.

Radke started forming bands in his high school years. His first band was 3.0. The logo of this band was made in paint program and resembled the Ninja Turtles logo. His second band named Lefty (with Robert Ortiz) competed in the high school talent contest. When on stage and Radke's microphone fell, Max Green (who was in a band called Almost Heroes at the time) picked it up for him and they almost instantly became friends. Together, they formed a band called True Story. They got out of the pop punk scene and got into Trice and similar bands. He started playing piano and guitar. He played left-handed guitar, but still played a normal right-handed guitar when he played Blink 182 songs. At age 21, Radke founded with Max Green the band Escape the Fate. He made two albums with the band and two albums EP. The more popular was "Dying Is Your Latest Fashion",it was released September 26, 2006. In late 2008 Radke left Escape the Fate. Radke is now founded the band Falling in Reverse and continues to make music. Now he has several lead singles from the album "The Drug In Me is You".

With Escape the Fate

With Falling in Reverse



