Mena Suvari

Mena Alexandra Suvari (born February 13, 1979) is an American actress, fashion designer, and model. She began acting in guest roles on 1990s television programs such as "Boy Meets World" and "High Incident". She made her movie debut in the 1997 drama movie "Nowhere".

Her first major movie roles were in "American Beauty" and "American Pie". Both of these moves were in 1999. She was nominated for a BAFTA Award for "American Beauty". Next she was in "Loser" (2000), with her "American Pie" co-star, Jason Biggs. In 2001, she played the main character in the comedy movie "Sugar & Spice". She was in the 2002 drama "Spun" and the 2004 thriller "Trauma". She was also in the HBO's drama series "Six Feet Under" in 2004. While working on this series, she was nominated as a member of cast by the Screen Actors Guild for "Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series" in 2005. In 2008, she was cast in a many movies. These incude "Day of the Dead", "The Mysteries of Pittsburgh", and the movie version of "The Garden of Eden".

Suvari is a model for Lancôme cosmetics. She has been in many fashion blogs and magazines such as "Vogue". She is an activist for the African relief organization, the African Medical and Research Foundation. Feminist issues are also important to her. She works with charities whose cause is breast cancer, and "End Violence Against Women" campaign.

Suvari was born in Newport, Rhode Island. She is the daughter of Candice, a nurse, and Ando Süvari, a psychiatrist. Her mother is half Greek and her father is part Estonian. She has three older brothers.

Her family moved Charleston, South Carolina. Growing up, Mena wanted to be an archaeologist, astronaut or doctor. A modeling agency came to her all-girls school, Ashley Hall, to offer classes. By the time she started acting, she had been modeling for the New York-based Wilhelmina agency for five years.

After moving to the Los Angeles area, Suvari studied at Providence High School in Burbank. She graduated in 1997.

Suvari married German-born cinematographer Robert Brinkmann on March 4, 2000. Brinkmann was seventeen years older than her. They divorced in May 2005.

In 2007, Suvari began dating Italian-Canadian concert promoter Simone Sestito. She met him at the 2007 Toronto International Film Festival. They were married on June 26, 2010 in Rome. They chose Rome because most of Sestito's family lives near the city. On January 13, 2012, Suvari said she wanted a divorce from Sestito.


