The Last of Us

The Last of Us is a third person survival horror action-adventure video game made by Naughty Dog and published by Sony Computer Entertainment. It released for the Play Station 3 on 14th June 2013 and the new version from the view point of grafic of this game called came for the Play Station 4 on 29th july 2014.This version also has a downloadable content called Left Behind.The story is about two people trying for surviving,how Joel and Ellie fight with the dangerouses that happen for them.

The Last of Us takes place twenty years in an alternate future where a deadly fungus outbreak has occurred in the United States, spreading throughout earth, creating zombie like creatures from the corpses of the dead. The Story focusses on Joel and Ellie, two survivors that have escaped the soldier patrolled quarantine zones, in hopes to find the cure to the disease that Ellie may be the beginning of. Throughout their trip, they encounter a variety of different people that sometimes help them, and other times try to hurt them.
Joel lives with sarah (his 12 years old daughter) in America.One night when the people were asleep,sounds of explosions,broke the silence.It seems that a kind of mushroom sick goes to the humens body and changes their Genetics and make them to "Wild people eater".Joel and his brother,Tommy,with sarah want to escape from the city but the city has surrounded by Armed Soldiers and in the middle of the way,sarah is shot by one of the soldiers and dies in her father's arms.
20 years later,when many people have died by this sick,the survivors live in a quarantine area.Joel with his friend ,Tess, do smuggle in that area but a person named Robert has stolen their weapons.
After the fights that they do with Robert,Robert tells them that he has gave the weapons to a group called fire fly.Marlin is the head of this group and promises to Joel and Tess that he will give back their weapons if they give a girl called Ellie to the fire flies.

The game got great reception, getting over 120 awards and receiving the title of 2013's game of the year. IGN rated the game 10 out of 10, along with many other national game raters, that all rated the game highest any game has ever received. During the first week, the game sold over 3.4 million copies, second only to Grand Theft Auto in sales records .
The Last of Us is the most awarded game of all time,winning over 200 game of the year awards.This game has applaused by the Criticizers and took over than 50 complete numbers and the average of the numbers is 95 from 100.

The Last of Us is a third-person perspective game.The first characters of the game are Joel and Ellie .For most of the game,players control Joel and Ellie is controlled by the Artificial Intelligence.Players also control Ellie and Sarah in a fewparts of the game.In this game you can use diffrent guns and other things which you find in the environment like knifes to kill your enemies.

The game includes a multiplayer side, where the player can choose to be a Hunter or a Firefly, with the objective of completing twelve weeks (84 days/games) on each side. It comes with multiple different modes and maps.





