Elle Varner

Gabrielle Shellise Varner (born February 12, 1989), simply known as Elle Varner is an American singer-songwriter. Her parents, Mikelyn Roderick and Jimmy Varner were publishers and songwriters. Elle signed a recording agreement with Sony Music in 2009. Her debut album "Perfectly Imperfect" was released on August 7, 2012. Two singles from the album were released: "Only Wanna Give It to You" and "Refill". The singles reached the top twenty on the US "Billboard" Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart.

Elle is of Cape Verdean descent. She is the daughter of Mikelyn Roderick and Jimmy Varner. They are publishers and songwriters. Roderick was a backing vocalist for Barry White and has written and recorded with Tevin Campbell and Rahsaan Patterson. Jimmy Varner has done collaborations with Gerald Alston, Kool & the Gang, and Will Downing. 

Elle began playing the flute at age 6 and the piano at age 9. She grew up around recording studios because of her parents jobs. She attended Alexander Hamilton High School's Academy of Music's Vocal Jazz Group. She wrote songs while being there. One of which "Thankful" won the top prize at their talent show. Because of this, she was accepted in NYU's Clive Davis Department of Recorded Music. She graduated there in 2008. In October 2009, she signed a recording agreement with MBK/J-RCA Records along with an agreement with Sony Music. She became the first artist to be featured on BET's Music Matters campaign that same year.

Elle's debut single "Only Wanna Give It to You" was released on August 6, 2011, from her debut album "Perfectly Imperfect" (2012). It features American rapper J. Cole. It got to number 20 on the US "Billboard" Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. In October 2011, Elle was listed as one of TheBoomBox's "15 Artists to Watch". On October 7, 2011, Elle was moved to RCA Records. 

Elle released a mixtape "Conversational Lush" on January 23, 2012, as a promotion of her new album. The song "Refill" was released as the second single on January 31, 2012, on iTunes. It debuted at number 78 on the US "Billboard" Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. Elle's debut album was released on August 7, 2012 and got to number three on the US "Billboard" 200 albums chart.





