Malala Yousafzai

Malala Yousafzai (born July 12, 1997 ) is a Pakistani student and education activist. She is known for her activism for girls' and women's rights, especially for her campaign to allow girls go to school. Yousafzai is originally from the town of Mingora in the Swat District. She was a victim of a gunshot attack in October 2012. Yousafzai is the youngest person to have won the Nobel Peace Prize. She won the prize in October 2014. She was 17.

In 2009, at age 11, many people got to know her through a weblog of the BBC News' Urdu language service. The BBC published translated writings about her life under Taliban rule. On 9 October 2012, Yousafzai was shot in the head and neck in an assassination attempt by Atta Ullah Khan, a Taliban gunman.

She was given emergency treatment in Pakistan and then moved to Great Britain for more medical treatment.

On 3 January 2013, Yousafzai was discharged from the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham to continue to recover at her family's temporary home in the West Midlands. She had two five-hour long operations on 2 February 2013. She had a titanium plate put over the hole in her skull and a cochlear implant so she could hear again.

In May 2012 David Trumble, an award-winning artist, made a cartoon of Yousafzai as a Disney princess as part of a drawing of other feminist icons that he had made into princesses that was in the Huffington Post.

On 12 July 2013, at age 16, she made a speech at headquarters of the United Nations, stressing the right to education for all and for human rights and peace and non-violence against terrorism and intolerance citing the proverb: "the pen is mightier than the sword".

She was nominated for the 2013 Nobel Peace Prize. She has won a number of prizes. She is the 2013 recipient of the Sakharov Prize. She was one of the winners of Glamour magazine's Women of the Year. Lady Gaga, who was also a winner and was on the month's cover, said that Yousafzai should have been on November's cover of Glamour instead of her.

On October she met President Obama, Michelle Obama, and their daughter Malia in the Oval Office.

The Taliban have said that they still want to assassinate Yousafzai.

In October 2013 a book about her life "" was published, with her help. The book was banned in Pakistani private schools.

On 27 November 2013 Yousafzai was given the GG2 Hammer Award at the GG2 (Garavi Gujarat2) Leadership Awards 2013.

Yousafzai was chosen by "TIME" magazine as a candidate for 2013's Person of the Year.

She was nominated for the World's Children's Prize for the Rights of the Child in 2014.

In 2014 Yousafzai has won Nobel Peace Prize and will be given a Doctor of Civil Law degree by the University of King's College.


