Kevin Hart

Kevin Hart (born July 3, 1979) is an American actor and comedian. Born and raised in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Hart began his career by winning several amateur comedy competitions at clubs throughout New England, culminating in his first real break in 2000 when he was cast by Judd Apatow for a recurring role on the TV series "Undeclared". The series lasted only one season, but he soon landed other roles in movies like "Paper Soldiers", "Scary Movie 3", "Think Like a Man", "Little Fockers" and "Soul Plane". His comedic reputation continued to grow with the release of his first stand-up album "I'm a Grown Little Man" in 2008. This was followed by "Seriously Funny" in 2010, and in 2011 "Laugh at My Pain". He currently stars as himself in the lead role of "Real Husbands of Hollywood". 

Kevin Hart was born on July 6, 1979, in North Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He was raised by his single mother, Nancy, and has one older brother, Robert Hart. His father, Henry, a cocaine addict, was in and out of jail throughout most of Kevin's childhood. Kevin used his natural ability to make people laugh as a coping mechanism to deal with his family struggles and to stay out of trouble. After attending George Washington High School in Northeast Philadelphia, he moved to New York City to attend community college, graduating two years later. He then moved to Brockton, Massachusetts, and found work as a shoe salesman. He began pursuing a career in stand-up comedy after performing at an amateur night at a club in Philadelphia.

In 2005, he was nominated for the BET Platinum Mic Viewers' Choice Award.

In 2012 Hart was named MVP of the NBA Celebrity All-Star Game regardless of the fact that he was ejected in the fourth quarter for cursing at the referee and taking off one of his shoes and throwing the other across the court. He scored eight points and had six assists in the game.

Hart then hosted the 2012 "MTV Video Music Awards". His longtime friend Judd Apatow, the director who gave him his first big on-screen break in the TV series "Undeclared", was the one who recommended him for the gig. Hart hopes that this will project him further into a side career as an emcee, stating, "Hopefully after MTV, of course we’re talking Emmys, Oscars, whatever."

In 2012, Hart won a Best Actor trophy at the BET Awards for his performance in the box-office hit movie "Think Like a Man".



