Toulouse

Toulouse () is a commune in southwestern France. It is the capital of the department of Haute-Garonne, as well as of the Occitanie region. It is also the capital of the "arrondissement" of Toulouse. In 2014, 1.312.304 people live in the urban area, and 466.297 in the city itself. Toulouse is the 4 largest city of France.

The city has a unique architecture made of pinkish terracotta bricks, which earned it the nickname "la Ville Rose" ("the Pink City"). Toulouse counts two UNESCO World Heritage Sites: the Canal du Midi (designated in 1996 and shared with other cities) and the St. Sernin Basilica, the largest remaining Romanesque building in Europe, designated in 1998.

The city was the capital of the Visigothic Kingdom in the 5th century and the capital of the old French province of Languedoc in the late Middle Ages and early modern period (provinces were abolished during the French Revolution), making it the unofficial capital of the cultural region of Occitania (Southern France). It is now the capital of the Occitanie region, the largest region in metropolitan France.

The city of Toulouse is along the Garonne river, from the Mediterranean Sea, from the Atlantic Ocean, and from Paris.

The "commune" has an area of , and its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is ..

The climate of Toulouse, in the Köppen climate classification, is Cfb - Oceanic climate with template summers.

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Toulouse is . The month with the most precipitation on average is May with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is July with an average of . There are an average of 74.0 days of precipitation, with the most rain occurring in May with 7.0 days and the least rain occurring in July with 4.4 days.

The average temperature for the year in Toulouse is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The inhabitants of Toulouse are known, in French, as "Toulousains" (women: "Toulousaines").

Toulouse has a population, in 2014, of 466,297, for a population density of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Toulouse

Toulouse is the prefecture of the Haute-Garonne department, the capital of the "arrondissement" of Toulouse and the administrative centre () of 11 cantons: 

It is part of the intercommunality "Metropolitan Toulouse" ().

Saint-Gaudens is twinned with:

Toulouse also has accords of cooperation with the following towns:

In addition, Toulouse has an adoption city:






