JYJ

JYJ (formerly known as Junsu/Jejung/Yuchun in Japan) is a boy group made up of three members who are formed by the former members of South Korean group TVXQ, in 2010. JYJ members are Jaejoong, Yuchun, and Junsu. Their group name is taken from the first letter of each member's name.

The group has released two studio albums so far. Because they were at law with SM entertainment, JYJ did many concert over the world after 2010.

On July 31, 2009, the three TVXQ members who became JYJ, filed a lawsuit against SM entertainment. They argued that the their contracts' period was too long for 13-year length excluding the military service and that the profit distribution was disadvantageous towards the artists. So they maintained their contracts should be invalidated. In addition, the former three TVXQ members applied for an injunction that was the same as the lawsuit to engage their entertainment activities. The Seoul Central District Court in October 2009 ruled in favor of JYJ affirming their right to independently engage in entertainment activities and granted JYJ's injunction suspending the JYJSM entertainment contract.

The three members of JYJ continued their activities as TVXQ in Japanin the end of 2009 for over half a year after the filing of the injunction until their Japanese agency, Avex, announced a group hiatus in early 2010.

JYJ members who were known as Junsu/Jejung/Yuchun in Japan continued their entertainment activities for over half a year after the filing of the injunction until their Japanese agency, Avex, announced a group hiatus in 2010. At Japan, JYJ performed the live concerts, "Thanksgiving live in Dome concerts" in June. They also had performances at the nationwide a-nation tour throughout August. JYJ's debut album, "The...", was released in September 2010, and debuted at number one on Oricon albums charts in the first week.

JYJ members made a contract with C-Jes Entertainment in Korea.

In September 2010, Avex Entertainment announced plans to suspend all of JYJ's Japanese activities claiming this stemmed from issues the label had with the president of JYJ's Korean management, C-JeS Entertainment.

JYJ released their worldwide debut album, "The beginning", on October 12 with "Ayyy Girl" as a lead track.

JYJ promoted their new album, "The beginning", through the worldwide showcase tour in South Korea, Southes Asia, and the United States.
On November 27 and 28, they performed "JYJ Worldwide Concert in Seoul", two-day concerts that were held at Seoul's Jamsil Olympic Stadium.

JYJ released their Korean EP, "Their Rooms "Our Story"" on January 25, 2011 in the format of a "music essay".

On 17 February 2011, the Seoul Central District Court dismissed SM Entertainment's injunction against the three members, filed in April 2010 for damage compensation.

In the spring of 2011, JYJ performed their first Worldwide concert Tours that were held in Thailand, Taiwan, China, Canada, and the United States. They finished their fist Worldwide concert tours with performing two special encore concerts in South Korea on June.
In September, JYJ released their first Korean studio album entitled "In Heaven".
JYJ extended their World Tour by adding performance dates in Barcelona, Spain on October 29 and in Berlin, Germany on November 6.

In January 2012, C-JeS announced two more concert dates, with Santiago, Chile being March 9 and Lima, Peru March 11. JYJ's first Worldwide concer tour came to the end in South America. 
On February 23, JYJ released a 90-minute film titled "The Day". It is a documentary film featuring their daily lives and dreams and a kind of fan events.
Starting on June 28, JYJ held the first and the largest-scale international fan fair for free in South Korea. This event was the big event expressing JYJ's thanks for fans and was opened for 4 days—from June 28 to July 1—at SETEC (Seoul Trade Exhibition & Conventions) at Hak Yeo Ul station. This membership week included photographic and video-based exhibitions of the band, as well as two sets of fan meetings. Because of great fan's cheering, JYJ's representative C-JeS Entertainment announced that this Membership Week event will be held annually.

On 28 November 2012, during a voluntary arbitration at the Seoul Central District Court, SM Entertainment and JYJ have reached a mutual agreement to terminate all contracts between the two parties and not to interfere with each other's activities in the future. At last, concluding the three years and four months, exclusive contract lawsuit came to the end.

concerts

Documentaries



