Christina Crawford (wrestler)

Christina Crawford (born October 17, 1988) is an American dancer and professional wrestler. She is best known for working for WWE where she wrestled in their developmental territory Florida Championship Wrestling and NXT, under the ring name Caylee Turner.

Crawford first became well known on WWE's "Tough Enough". It is a reality television series. The winner of "Tough Enough" would get WWE contract. She did not win, but did well enough that WWE gave her a job.

In June 2010, Crawford signed a contract with WWE. She was later sent to Florida Championship Wrestling (FCW). She first appeared on July 8, 2010 in a bikini contest. On November 20 that she made her first wrestling appearance using the new ring name Caylee Turner. It was a 6 diva tag team match with Rosa Mendes and Aksana. Her team lost the match to AJ Lee, Kaitlyn and Naomi Knight. In February 2011, Crawford was let go from her WWE contract.

In March 2011, Crawford was listed as one of the fourteen people on the new version of "Tough Enough". On the May 16th edition of "Tough Enough", Christina was in a match with A.J. Kirsch where she hurt her ankle. She was taken to the emergency room. On the May 23rd edition of "Tough Enough", Christina was cut from the competition as was with A.J. Kirsch.

After leaving "Tough Enough", Crawford went back to work for FCW. On June 22, 2011, she teamed up with Irena Janjic to face Audrey Marie and Sonia in a tag team match but lost. On the August 7, 2011 episode of FCW television, she teamed up with A.J. and Kaitlyn. They beat the team of Sonia, Audrey Marie, and Raquel Diaz. On August 14 edition of FCW, Caylee teamed up with Naomi to defeat the team of Kaitlyn & Audrey Marie. On August 14, 2012, WWE released Crawford from her contract.

Crawford is of African American descent. She graduated from the University of Central Florida in 2011. She studied interpersonal communications. She has an older sister named Victoria, who is a professional wrestler for WWE, under the ring name Alicia Fox.



