Open Season (movie series)

The series of Open Season movies from Sony Pictures Animation includes "Open Season" (2006), "Open Season 2" (2008), "Open Season 3" (2010), as well as a short movie called "Boog and Elliot's Midnight Bun Run" (2006).
Video game based on the "Open Season" movie was released on many platforms.

A 900-pound grizzly bear named Boog living in the town of Timberline (Martin Lawrence) meets Elliot (Ashton Kutcher), a one-horned mule deer. They end up stranded together in the woods during hunting season and they have to beat the hunters with the help of all the other animals. In the end, Boog decides to stay in the forest and says goodbye to his owner Ranger Beth (Debra Messing).

Elliot (Joel McHale) falls in love with Giselle (Jane Krakowski). However, his friend Mr. Weenie (Cody Cameron) is kidnapped by a group of pampered pets determined to return him to his owners. Elliot (who leads the way), Boog (Mike Epps) (who also leads the way), Giselle, McSquizzy (Billy Connolly), Buddy (Matthew W. Taylor), and Serge (Danny Mann) and Deni (Matthew W. Taylor) go on a long journey to rescue Weenie. However, the pets, lead by a poodle named Fifi (Crispin Glover), insist on fighting for Weenie. In the end, Mr. Weenie decides to go back to his owners and leave the wild.

Boog (Matthew J. Munn) thinks that Elliot (Matthew W. Taylor) has not been as close a friend since he started a family with kids of his own. In search for real friends, Boog stumbles upon a circus in Russia where he meets a talented female bear named Ursa (Melissa Sturm) (whom he falls madly in love with) and a clever bear who looks like him, named Doug (Matthew J. Munn). Boog switches places with Doug while so Doug can escape. When Elliot, Mr. Weenie, and the pets and other wild animals realize Boog is missing, they all get together and set up a plan to get Boog back. In the end, Ursa decides to live with Boog and his friends.

A short movie, "Boog and Elliot's Midnight Bun Run", was released in 2007 and is featured on the "Open Season" DVD and Blu-ray.




