Radio Studio 54 Network

Radio Studio 54 Network, or Studio 54 Network, is an Italian private radio station based in Locri, Calabria. Emissions reach Studio 54 Network on FM in nine provinces in five regions of southern Italy: Messina, Reggio Calabria, Vibo Valentia, Catanzaro, Cosenza,Crotone, Lecce, Potenza and Salerno. The programming is characterized by the transmission of musical hits and real-time information, with 28 daily updates.

Studio 54 Network was founded on June 6, 1985 from an idea of Pietro Parretta and Francesco Massara with Enzo Gatto, Memmo Minniti, Pietro Musmeci, with the historic name of "Radio DJ Studio Club 54".

Like almost all the free radio stations began as a game, and then in the early 1990s, came the awareness of not leaving behind career goals.

With the Mammì law for the Italian broadcast in 1990, the game replaces the company.

In 1991, was the first Calabrian radios (and one of the first in Italy) to use the Radio Data System.

In 1994, the issue was digitized, and since then the transmission quality can not be matched with analog equipment. This was the first time in Calabria that this was achieved, and the first time in Italy that this technology is fully utilized for this purpose.

Since 1995, thanks to the acquisition of business of other Calabrian issuers, leaving the boundaries of the historic Ionian coast of the Province of Reggio Calabria, expanding its customer base in Calabria and then adjacent regions.

In 1997 he was one of the first Italian radios perform transmission experiments, especially regarding webcasting technology in Real Audio.

In 1998, its name changed "Studio 54 Network".

In 2000, construction of the first mobile studio Stargate marked the beginning of a new editorial policy: radio broadcasting from the square, the crowd.


Memmo Minniti, Tommaso Massara, Clementina Parretta, Enzo Gatto, Francesca Ritorto, Pino Martelli, Espedita Rechichi, Sergio Minniti, Gianluca Laganà, Rossana Pedullà, Ugo La Macchia, Paolo Guerrieri, Antonio Lombardo, Rosy Carelli, Giuseppe Galluzzo, Peppe Lentini, Paolo Guerrieri, Chiara Mearelli, Luca Filippone, Enrico Ventrice, Valentina Ammirato, Massimo Apa, Emily and Debora LoGiacco, Barbara Costa, Pasquale Fragomeni, Roberta Rupo, Veronica De Biase, Valentina Geracitano, Francesco Cunsolo, Francesco Parasporo, Antonella Romeo, Eleonora Femia, Rosana and Regina Garofalo, Debora Sainato, Ugo Lully Tommaselli, Pino Trecozzi, Luigi Grandinetti, Eddy and Ottavia Lombardo, Antony Greco, Sandro Pascuzzo, Giuseppe Evalto, Stefania Morabito.

Studio 54 LiveTour is an outdoor spectacle which started in 2000. The travelling show (also broadcast live on the internet) lasts an entire day and includes special guests, music, games, entertainment, and a disco.

The 54 Angels are the Studio54 Network's front girls. Created to support all external activities of Studio54 Network, became in 2010 a team for the animation of any event, whether or not produced by Studio 54 Network.

They have mobile units, such as jeeps or convertibles, thanks to which they can quickly reach the required events.

The external Studio 54 Network Teams, as well as the organization of instore promotions at national level, meet the delivery models, and are structured to provide services in direct supply to companies and professionals in subcontracting and other agencies in the sector.
Studio54network offers a wide selection of hostesses and models selected from throughout the country.

Studio 54 Stargate hosts the station's main activities and live broadcasts. It is a fully equipped mobile radio and television studio comprising three units: a creative console for audio and video, plus two separate units for production, post-production, and audio-video streaming.



