Graphic design

Graphic design is a practical art which helps in communication. Visual information is formed in such a way that it produces a message. This can be done by placing words and pictures in ways that will get the attention of others. People who do graphic design as work are called "graphic designers". In printed media, graphic design includes typography, organising illustration, book design, page layout, specifying print.

Graphic design can be done in different media. These include paper, video, labels, and web sites. 

"Graphic design" is a vast and varied discipline, using many skills, rules and techniques to be able to provide the right information. It is both a combination of artistic expression and media relations. A graphic designer takes an idea and makes it work.

Graphic design is the process of visual communication and problem-solving using one or more of typography, photography and illustration. The field is considered a subset of visual communication and communication design, but sometimes the term "graphic design" is used synonymously.

Typography

Typography includes type design, modifying type glyphs and arranging type. Type glyphs (characters) are created and modified using illustration techniques. Type arrangement is the selection of typefaces, point size, tracking (the space between all characters used), kerning (the space between two specific characters) and leading (line spacing).

Page layout

Page layout deals with the arrangement of elements (content) on a page, such as image placement, text layout and style. Page design has always been a consideration in printed material and more recently extended to displays such as web pages. Elements typically consist of type (text), images (pictures), and (with print media) occasionally place-holder graphics for elements that are not printed with ink such as die/laser cutting, foil stamping or blind embossing.

Printmaking

Printmaking is the process of making artworks by printing on paper and other materials or surfaces. The process is capable of producing multiples of the same work, each called a print. Each print is an original, technically known as an impression. Prints are created from a single original surface, technically a matrix. Common types of matrices include: plates of metal, usually copper or zinc for engraving or etching; stone, used for lithography; blocks of wood for woodcuts, linoleum for linocuts and fabric plates for screen-printing. 

Tools

Present, graphic design in digital also refers to graphic design applications, which vary from vector design software, social media graphic design software, invitation design creator, 3D graphic design tool, and all that. Famous powerful tools are Photoshop, 3D Blender, Illustrator, Corel PaintShop, DrawPlus and etc.
References

Graphic Design Software List


