Belize District

The Belize District is a district of the nation of Belize. The district capital is the nation's largest city, Belize City. 

San Pedro Town, which is on the island of Ambergris Caye, is also in the Belize District. Caye Caulker and St. George's Caye are the island villages in this district. Maskall, Bomba, Corozalito, Santana, Lucky Strike, Rockstone Pond, Boston, Crooked Tree, Biscayne, May Pen, Gardenia, Grace Bank, Sand Hill, Lord's Bank, Ladyville, Burrel Boom, Buttercup, Scotland Halfmoon, Flowers Bank, Bermudian Landing, Isabella Bank, Double Head Cabbage, Willows Bank, Saint Paul's Bank, Big Falls, Rancho Dolores, Hattieville, Freetown Sibun, Gracie Rock, La Democracia, and Gales Point are all mainland villages in the Belize District. The Crooked Tree and Monkey Bay Wildlife Sanctuaries, the Belize Zoo (30 miles west of Belize City), as well as the ancient Maya ruins of Altun Ha are all in this district.

The Belize District was the area first settled by Europeans. They lived along the rivers and creeks because these waterways were used for transportation. Many of the estates were called the owner's 'bank'(as in the banks of a river). Therefore, Mr. Lord's estate on the bank of the Belize River became Lord's Bank. Mr. Flowers' home place on this same river became Flowers Bank. Many of these old estates have grown into villages. Other places such as Baker, Bob Eiley, Bocotora, Nago Bank, Washing Tree, Cedar Bank, Churchyard, Egypt, Watters Bank, and White Hill are old estates which did not become villages. Some places like Davis Bank and Tropical Park have now become parts of larger communities.

Most of the Belize District is in the east central mainland of Belize. The Belize District also includes offshore islands, including Ambergris Caye, Caye Caulker, St. George's Caye, Caye Chapel, English Caye and Goff's Caye. Ambergris Caye and Caye Caulker are two of the country's main tourism areas. The longest river in the country, the Belize River, passes through the district and joins the Caribbean Sea along its coast. The Northern River, Sibun River, and Manatee River are also in this District. 


