Adrian Fenty

Adrian Malik Fenty (born December 6, 1970) was the sixth, and youngest Mayor of the District of Columbia. He was a national leader in urban education reform. He lost his re-election bid in the 2010 Democratic primary to Vincent C. Gray, who went on to win the general election for Mayor.

Fenty grew up in the Mount Pleasant neighborhood of Washington, D.C., and graduated from Mackin Catholic High School. As a teenager, he worked at Swenson's Ice Cream next to the Uptown Theatre.

Fenty's mother is white, and his father is African-American. Adrian Fenty is the middle child of three boys—older brother Shawn, a bicycle expert, and younger brother Jess. Their parents are runners and own a Fleet Feet athletic shoe store in the D.C. neighborhood of Adams Morgan. Adrian has run in the Cherry Blossom Ten Mile Run each year since 2004, improving his finishing time from 1:17:22 (2005) to 1:02:59 (2009).

Fenty earned a B.A. in English and Economics at Oberlin College and a J.D. from the Howard University School of Law. He is a member of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity.

In 1997, Fenty and lawyer Michelle Cross eloped. Michelle Cross Fenty works for the Inter-American Development Bank. They have three children: twins Matthew and Andrew (b. 2000) and Aerin Alexandra (b. 2008).

Fenty was an intern for Senator Howard Metzenbaum (D-OH), Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton (D-DC), and Representative Joseph P. Kennedy II (D-MA) before becoming involved in local politics. In addition to serving as an aide to Councilmember Kevin P. Chavous, he was elected as an Advisory Neighborhood Commissioner in ANC 4C and was president of the 16th Street Neighborhood Civic Association.

In 2000, Fenty won a seat on the D.C. Council. Fenty ran against long-time Ward 4 Councilmember Charlene Drew Jarvis. Jarvis was well-known and a heavy favorite, but Fenty campaigned hard. He pursued an aggressive door-to-door strategy that put up countless green yard signs. It worked; Fenty was elected to the Council seat by a 57–43 percent margin. Unopposed in both the primary and general elections in 2004, Fenty was reelected for a second term.

As a Council member, Fenty worked on constituent services. He opposed public funding for a new baseball stadium. He proposed funding a $1 billion capital improvement program for public schools, which the Council subsequently passed in an altered form. He is a member of the Mayors Against Illegal Guns Coalition, an organization formed in 2006 and co-chaired by New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg and Boston mayor Thomas Menino.

While major, Fenty used three BlackBerry devices. One BlackBerry directly connects him to Police Chief Cathy Lanier while the latter two are for business and personal matters.

Fenty formally announced his campaign for D.C. Mayor on June 1, 2005. In the fall of 2005, then-mayor Anthony A. Williams made the widely anticipated announcement that he would not seek re-election, and then-Council Chair Linda Cropp announced she would be a candidate for Mayor. Other candidates in the field included businesswoman Marie Johns, then-Councilmember Vincent Orange, and lobbyist Michael A. Brown (who dropped out of the race in September 2006).

Fenty ran on a platform of bringing a more energetic and hands-on approach to city government. Cropp trumpeted her 25 years of experience in city government and her desire to continue the progress made by Anthony Williams, who endorsed her candidacy. The race was widely viewed as neck-and-neck through the spring of 2006. Both candidates raised significant and nearly equal amounts of money – roughly $1.75 million through June 10, 2006 – and neither gained any significant advantages from the numerous candidate debates and forums.

By July 2006 public and private polling gave Fenty a roughly 10-point advantage. Political observers have debated whether it was Fenty's unprecedented door-to-door campaign (he and his campaign visited virtually every block in the city), Cropp's lack of engagement in the campaign, or the electorate's desire for a new direction after eight years of Anthony Williams. Cropp's campaign began a series of negative attacks during the last month of the campaign. In direct mail and television advertisements, Cropp painted Fenty as unfit for the job and a careless lawyer who had been admonished by the D.C. Bar; in 2005, he received an informal admonition from the Bar for his role in a probate case in 1999. The attacks, however, backfired; the reaction, coupled with the endorsement of the "Washington Post", extended Fenty's lead in the campaign's final weeks.

On September 12, 2006, Fenty won all 142 city precincts in the Democratic Primary. This had never happened before in District of Columbia history—and defeated Linda Cropp by a 57–31 percent margin.

Fenty received 89% of the vote in the general election. He became the District's sixth elected mayor since the establishment of home rule.

Fenty spent a lot of attention on education reform. On the first day of his term, in an unprecedented and controversial move, Fenty introduced legislation to restructure the school system to place full responsibility for schools under his purview. Across the city, District residents had been demanding that the schools be "fixed". Schools in the District had been troubled for years with student test performance scores and graduation rates among the lowest in the nation. In 1996, a Control Board appointed by Congress had taken over control of the public school system, declaring that the schools were in a "state of emergency". Mayor Fenty viewed this re-structuring as the solution.

In April, 2007, the D.C. Council approved Fenty's school takeover plan, and in May 2007, legislation needed to approve the change was passed by Congress and signed by President Bush. Under the new structure, the existing superintendent was replaced by a school chief, or chancellor, who was selected by the mayor reported directly to him. This power shift also allowed him to make swift changes in the system’s central office, alter teacher qualification requirements, and implement a school consolidation process. His selection of Michelle Rhee to manage District schools surprised many people. In choosing Rhee, he stepped outside of the local landscape to consult with national education experts including New York City School Chancellor Joel Klein. 

The move to restructure the school's reporting system and the addition of a school chancellor as a direct report have been credited with putting the school system on the path to long-awaited improvements. To ensure that maximum resources go directly to classrooms, the Mayor and Chancellor closed 23 underenrolled schools and significantly reduced the school system's central administrative staff. 
Student achievement at the secondary level rose 14 points in reading and 17 points in math since 2007, gains that are unprecedented in DC history and unparalleled nationwide. Student SAT scores rose 27 points in 2010. Graduation rates have risen each year since 2007, and 72 percent of District students took the Practice Scholastic Aptitude Test, a.k.a. the PSAT, which functions as a practice test for students entering college. His administration has also taken on a major, five-year maintenance and construction effort to dramatically improve school buildings by 2014. The Mayor and Chancellor successfully negotiated a collective bargaining agreement with the Washington Teachers Union. The contract has become a national model for other jurisdictions, especially because it establishes a system of performance-based teacher compensation. 

While focusing on improving schools, the Fenty Administration changed District agencies, ensuring more efficient and effective service delivery throughout city government. Fenty's choice for police chief, Cathy Lanier, also made national headlines. Under Fenty, Lanier has added police officers to the streets and expanded community policing initiatives, for example, "beefing up" the policy of accepting anonymous text message tips from local residents to cut down on potential retaliation. By local news accounts, there is evidence of success. The homicide rate in the District dropped 25% in 2009. The homicide closure rate rose to 70%. In his "State of the District" speech, the Mayor reported that homicides were at their "lowest level since 1964" and that "both violent crimes and property crimes" had experienced a double-digit decline.

Fenty has championed development efforts across the city. Across the District, several schools, libraries, parks and recreation centers have been renovated to offer state-of-the-art facilities for residents, youth and families. One example is the sheer number of improvements in recreational play spaces for children. Under Fenty, 16 neighborhood and school playgrounds were opened and 9 play courts and fields were completed. Under his leadership, the District's largest shopping center, the DC USA Shopping Center, was opened. New developments, such as the Camp Simms retail development, have infused new life into the neighborhood with a retail grocery store and a sit-down restaurant east of the Anacostia River. Renovation of affordable housing units has helped to provide affordable housing during tough economic times. The Fenty Administration also expanded health care coverage for the uninsured, and established thousands of units of affordable housing, while creating the "Housing First" program to provide permanent supportive housing for the city’s homeless neighbors. The administration has made tremendous strides in reducing the backlog of Child Protective Services (CPS) investigations by improving the retention of social workers, increasing recruitment of social workers to fill vacancies, and building a quality leadership team with a depth of experience. Additionally, the Fenty Administration has improved the delivery of emergency medical services. It also finalized the sale of Greater Southeast Community Hospital (now United Medical Center) in a public-private partnership that kept the facility open for patients east of the Anacostia River.

In December 2009, Fenty made history by signing the Religious Freedom and Civil Marriage Equality Act of 2009, to legalize same-sex marriage in the District of Columbia. During the signing, Mayor Fenty and other attending city officials expressed their support of the gay rights movement by expressing that "they want the District to provide a road map for gay rights activists as the debate over same-sex marriage...moves across the nation..."

Mayor Fenty and his administration came under attack from political opponents. Council Chair Gray complained that Fenty did not share with the city council tickets donated by a local sports arena. Chair Gray demanded that Fenty hand the tickets over to him so Gray could have control of the tickets. 

The city council also charged that Fenty circumvented the D.C Council in making contracts for park improvements. Rather than treat them as city contracts, the contracts were made with the D.C. Housing Agency.

Fenty officially launched his reelection bid on April 10, 2010, at his campaign headquarters, located at 5929 Georgia Avenue, NW, in Washington, DC’s Brightwood neighborhood. The Fenty campaign’s headquarters were located on the site of the old Curtis Chevrolet dealership within Ward 4, the ward in which Fenty began his political career as an Advisory Neighborhood Commissioner in ANC 4C. 

Fenty faced ten candidates in the District’s September 14, 2010, Democratic primary. On July 31, 2009 (13½ months before the 2010 primary), Fenty's 2010 mayoral campaign passed the 2006 primary fundraising total of $2.4 million.

On August 1, 2010, the editorial board of "The Washington Post" officially endorsed Fenty. "Washington City Paper" followed on September 9.

One primary candidate in particular, Sulaimon Brown devoted his efforts to attacking Fenty rather than establishing his own positive campaign. After the election, Brown was given a $110,000 per year job in the D.C. Department of Health Care Finance of the new administration. However, Brown was fired because of questions about his past. In March 2011, Congress announced an investigation into the hiring of Brown.

A "Washington Post" poll released on Aug. 29 found Gray with a 17-point lead among likely voters. A Clarus poll conducted September 7 gave Gray a 7-point lead among likely voter, while a Public Policy Polling survey sponsored by WAMU-FM radio and "Washington City Paper" showed an 11 percent lead for Gray.

Fenty lost the Democratic primary election to Vincent C. Gray. Gray received 53 percent of the vote to Fenty's 46 percent. Following the reporting of the results, Fenty called it highly unlikely he will run for public office again. 
While Fenty received the most write-in votes for mayor in the Republican primary election, Fenty had previously said he would not accept the Republican nomination.

Fenty signed with Greater Talent Network, a major speakers bureau, in January 2011. The same month, Fenty became an outside adviser and counsel to Heffler, Radetich & Saitta, an accounting and consulting firm based in Philadelphia. Also in January 2011, it was announced that Fenty would become a distinguished visiting professor of politics, a featured lecturer and a career adviser in the Department of African American Studies at Oberlin College. In February 2011, Fenty became an outside adviser to Rosetta Stone, which produces foreign language software. In March 2011, Fenty became a strategic adviser for the state and local government practice of Capgemini Government Solutions LLC, an information technology consulting firm. In May 2011, Fenty became a member of the advisory board of EverFi Inc., an online education and certification firm. In July 2011, Fenty joined the law firm Klores Perry Mitchell P.C. as special counsel.

On the Morning Joe Program broadcast on March 8, 2011, Adrian Fenty backed Wisconsin Republican Governor Scott Walker's union busting bill and said that the Democratic State Senators should be held accountable.

2000 Council of the District of Columbia, Ward 4, Democratic Primary Election
2000 Council of the District of Columbia, Ward 4, General Election
2004 Council of the District of Columbia, Ward 4, Democratic Primary Election
2004 Council of the District of Columbia, Ward 4, General Election
2006 Mayor of the District of Columbia, Democratic Primary Election
2006 Mayor of the District of Columbia, General Election



