List of Medal of Honor recipients for the Vietnam War

The Vietnam War, (also known as the Second Indochina War, Vietnam Conflict, and in Vietnam as the American War), took place from 1965 to 1973. The war was fought between the Communist-supported Democratic Republic of Vietnam and the United States-supported Republic of Vietnam. It concluded with the defeat and failure of the United States foreign policy in Vietnam.

The Medal of Honor was created during the American Civil War. It is the highest military decoration presented by the United States government to a member of its armed forces. The recipients must have distinguished themselves at the risk of their own life above and beyond the call of duty in action against an enemy of the United States. Due to the nature of this medal it is commonly presented after the recipient has been killed (posthumously).

During the Vietnam War 248 Medals of Honor were received of which 156 of them were presented posthumously. Soldiers of the Army received the most with 161. Fifty seven went to the Marines and 16 to the Navy. The remaining 14 went to the Air Force. The first medal of the war was presented to Roger Donlon for rescuing and administering first aid to several wounded soldiers and leading a group against an enemy force. The first African American recipient of the war was Milton L. Olive, III who sacrificed himself to save others by smothering a grenade with his body. Riley L. Pitts was killed after attacking an enemy force with rifle fire and grenades and was the first African American commissioned officer of the war to receive the medal. Thomas Bennett was a conscientious objector who received the medal for his actions as a medic; three chaplains received the medal, including Vincent R. Capodanno, who served with the Marine Corps and was known as the Grunt padre.

The unknown soldier from the Vietnam War who was buried in the Tomb of the Unknowns was authorized a Medal of Honor and in 1998 was identified as 1st Lieutenant Michael Blassie. After DNA testing confirmed his identity, the remains were removed from the tomb and returned to Blassie's family, but the Medal of Honor remained as a tribute to those veterans still unknown. The Blassie family requested that the Medal of Honor be granted to him but the request was denied by the Department of Defense.



