Lok Sabha

The Lok Sabha or House of the People is the lower house of the Parliament of India. Members of the Lok Sabha are elected by direct election under universal adult franchise. As of 2014, there have been sixteen Lok Sabhas elected by the people of India. The Constitution limits the Lok Sabha to a maximum of 552 members. This includes no more than 20 members representing people from the Union Territories, and two appointed non-partisan members to represent the Anglo-Indian community (if the President feels that the community is not represented well enough).
Each Lok Sabha is formed for a five-year term. Normally, after five years, it is automatically dissolved. It can be extended by a proclamation of emergency. If this happens, the term may be extended for one year. It can be extended more than one time. The 16th and current Lok Sabha was formed in May 2014.

The Lok Sabha meets at the Lok Sabha Chambers, in Sansad Bhavan, Sansad Marg, in New Delhi.

During the British colonial period, the office of the Secretary of State for India (along with the Council of India) was the authority through whom the British Parliament exercised its rule in the Indian sub-continent. The Viceroy of India was created, along with an Executive Council, in India, which consisted of high officials of the British government. The Indian Councils Act 1861 provided for a Legislative Council consisting of the members of the Executive Council and non-official members; and the Indian Councils Act 1892 established legislatures in each of the provinces of British India. These Acts may have increased the Indian representation in government, but the councils' power remained limited, and the electorate also remained very small. The participation of Indians in the administration increased after the passage of the Indian Councils Act 1909 and the Government of India Act 1919. 

The Indian Independence Act was passed on July 18, 1947, and as a result British India was to be divided into India and Pakistan upon independence on August 15, 1947. They were to be dominions (India, Pakistan) under the Crown until they had enacted their own constitutions.

The Constituent Assembly was divided into two for the separate nations, with each new Assembly having sovereign powers transferred to it for the respective dominion.

India became a republic on January 26, 1950.


