List of Hispanic Medal of Honor recipients

The Medal of Honor was created during the American Civil War. It is the highest military decoration presented by the United States government to a member of its armed forces. The recipient must have distinguished themselves at the risk of their own life above and beyond the call of duty in action against an enemy of the United States. Due to the nature of this medal it is commonly presented after the recipient has been killed (posthumously).

Forty-four men of Hispanic heritage have been presented the Medal of Honor. Two were presented to members of the United States Navy. Thirteen to members of the United States Marine Corps. Twenty-nine to members of the United States Army. Twenty-five Medals of Honor were presented posthumously.

The first recipient was Corporal Joseph H. De Castro of the Union Army for his actions at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania on July 3, 186. He earned his in the American Civil War. The most recent recipient is Sergeant First Class Leroy Petry for his actions in Afghanistan. Corporal De Castro was a member of the Massachusetts Infantry. This militia was not part of the "regular" army. Private David Bennes Barkley was a member of the regular army during World War I and has been recognized as the Army's first Hispanic Medal of Honor recipient. In 1864, Seaman John Ortega became the first Hispanic member of the U.S. Navy to receive the Medal of Honor and in 1900, Private France Silva became the first person of Hispanic descent in the U.S. Marine Corps to receive the medal.

Ten recipients were born outside the United States mainland. One each in Chile and Spain. Four in Mexico and four in Puerto Rico. Seaman Philip Bazaar from Chile received the medal in January 1865 and Seaman John Ortega from Spain in December 1865. The first native Mexican recipient was Staff Sergeant Marcario Garcia and the first Puerto Rican was PFC Fernando Luis Garcia. 1st Lt. Rudolph B. Davila, of Hispanic-Filipino descent, was the only person of Filipino ancestry to receive the medal for his actions in the war in Europe during World War II. Private Joe P. Martinez was the first Hispanic-American recipient to be awarded the Medal of Honor posthumously for combat heroism on American soil during the same conflict. 1st Lt. Baldomero Lopez, is the only Hispanic graduate of the United States Naval Academy recipient of the Medal of Honor. Captain Humbert Roque Versace was the first recipient of the Medal of Honor to be given to an Army POW for his actions during captivity in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War.

Hispanic is an ethnic term employed to categorize any citizen or resident of the United States. They can be of any racial background, of any country, and of any religion, who has at least one ancestor from the people of Spain. They can also be of non-Hispanic origin but has an ancestor from Mexico, Puerto Rico, Cuba, Central or South America, or other Hispanic origin. The three largest Hispanic groups in the United States are the Mexican-Americans, Puerto Ricans and Cubans.

Three Hispanic Americans earned the Medal of Honor during the American Civil War. Two were sailors of the Union Navy and one was a soldier of the 19th Massachusetts Infantry.

During the Boxer rebellion only one Hispanic American received the Medal of Honor and that was France Silva who earned it for "distinguishing himself for meritorious conduct".

Note: The information in "Awards by branch of service Table" is based on the sourced information on the "List of Recipients Table".




