Brother Bear

Brother Bear is a 2003 traditionally-animated movie produced by Walt Disney Feature Animation and released by Walt Disney Pictures on November 1, 2003. It is about a human named Kenai who turns into a bear and discovers brotherhood. The 43rd animated feature in the Disney animated features canon, it was originally titled "Bears", and was the third and final Disney animated movie produced mainly by the Feature Animation studio at Disney-MGM Studios in Orlando, Florida, that studio was shut down in March 2004, not long after the release of this movie in favor of computer animated features. The movie received an Academy Award nomination for Best Animated Feature, but lost against Finding Nemo. A sequel, "Brother Bear 2", was released on August 29, 2006.
Long ago, as the Earth was emerging from the Ice Age, there were three brothers. After a bear takes the life of Sitka, the oldest brother, the impulsive youngest brother Kenai kills the bear in revenge, only to be changed into a bear himself by the Great Spirits. Denahi, the middle brother, comes upon this bear and, thinking it killed Kenai, vows revenge. Now, with brother hunting brother, Kenai's only hope to change back is to find the place where the lights touch the Earth. Along the way he meets a grizzly cub named Koda, who is also going there. So the adventure ensues and in the end, Kenai (with the help of Koda) discovers the true meaning of brotherhood.

The reaction from movie reviewers was mixed to negative with many panning the movie as coping older Disney movies like "The Lion King" and the 20th Century Fox movie "Ice Age" (although "Brother Bear" began production before "Ice Age" did), while others defended the movie as a different and resonable variation of the theme. The popular American movie critics Roger Ebert and Richard Roeper have given positive reviews of the movie. however so far, "Brother Bear" holds a rating of 38% in Rotten Tomatoes, which says that ""Brother Bear" is gentle and pleasant if unremarkable Disney fare, with so-so animation and generic plotting".


Score by Mark Mancina/Phil Collins


"Brother Bear 2" was released August 29, 2006.



