List of rivers of Russia

Russia can be divided into a European and an Asian part. The dividing line is generally considered to be the Ural Mountains and the Caspian Sea. The European part is drained into the Arctic Ocean, Baltic Sea, Black Sea and Caspian Sea. The Asian part is drained into the Arctic Ocean and the Pacific Ocean.

Notable rivers of Russia in Europe are the Volga, Don, Kama, Oka and the Northern Dvina.

In Asia, important rivers are the Ob, Irtysh, Yenisey, Angara River, Lena, Amur, Yana, Indigirka and Kolyma. 

In the list below, the rivers are grouped by the seas or oceans into which they flow. 

There is list by letter of rivers at the end of this article. 

The rivers in this section are sorted east to west.

The rivers in this section are sorted south-west to north-east.

The rivers in this section are sorted west to east.

The rivers in this section are sorted west to east.



The rivers in this section are sorted west to east.

The rivers in this section are sorted north to south.


Abakan, Alazeya, Aldan, Aley, Amga, Amur, Anabar, Anadyr, Angara River, Angrapa, Anyuy (Kolyma), Anyuy (Amur), Argun, Avacha, Barguzin, Bashkaus, Belaya, Berezayka, Bityug, Biya, Bolshaya Belaya, Bureya, Chagoda, Chebdar, Cheptsa, Chernaya, Chulym (Ob), Chulyshman, Chusovaya, Daugava/Western Dvina, Dep, Desna, Dnieper/Dnipro, Don, (Seversky) Donets, Dubna

Ilek, Indigirka, Ingoda, Instruch, Iokanga, Irkut, Irtysh, Iset, Ishim, Istra, Izhora, Kama, Kamchatka, Kashinka, Kasplya, Katanga, Katun, Kazanka, Kerzhenets, Ket, Khatanga, Kheta, Khopyor, Kirenga, Klyazma, Kolva (Usa), Kolva (Vishera), Kolyma, Kondurcha, Kosovka, Kosovoy, Kostroma, Kotorosl, Kotuy, Krasnaya River, Kuban, Kubr, Kuma, Kunya, Laba, Lama, Lava/Łyna, Lena, Lovat, Lower Tunguska, Luga

Malka, Manych, Maya, Mezen, Mga, Miass, Mius, Moksha, Mologa, Moskva, Msta, Mulyanka, Nadym, Nara, Narva, Neglinnaya, Nemunas/Neman, Nercha, Nerl (Klyazma), Nerl (Volga), Neva, Niva, Northern Dvina, Nyuya, Ob, Oka (Volga), Oka (Angara River), Olenyok, Olyokma, Om, Omolon, Onega, Onon, Oredezh, Osuga, Oyat, Pakhra, Pasha, Parabel, Pechora, Pinega, Pissa, Plava, Podkamennaya Tunguska, Podkumok, Pola, Polist, Polota, Ponoy, Pra, Pregolya, Protva, Pur, Pyasina, Ravan, Ruza, Sakmara, Sal, Samara, Seim, Selemdzha, Selenga, Sestra River (Leningrad Oblast), Sestra River (Dubna), Šešupė, Setun, Sheksna, Shelon, Shilka, Shosha, Sudost, Sukhona, Sura, Svir, Sviyaga, Syas, Sylva

Tavda, Tara, Taz, Terek, Tetere, Teza, Tigoda, Tobol, Tom (Ob), Tom (Zeya), Tosna, Tsna River (Moksha basin), Tsna River (Mstino Lake basin), Tumen, Tura, Turukhan, Tvertsa, Tym, Tyung, Uda (Buryatia), Uda (Khabarovsk Krai), Ufa, Uftyuga, Ugra, Unzha, Upa, Upper Angara River, Ural, Usa, Ussuri, Uver, Uzola, Vaga, Vakh, Valdayka, Varzuga, Vasyugan, Velikaya, Vetluga, Vilyuy, Vishera (Volkhov), Vishera (Vychegda), Vishera (Kama), Vitim, Volchya (Vuoksi), Volga, Volkhov, Vologda, Voronezh, Voronya, Vuoksi, Vyatka, Vyazma, Vychegda, Vytegra, Yana, Yauza, Yegoshikha, Yomtsa, Yenisei, Yug, Yuryuzan, Zeya


