Limón Province

Limón is a province of Costa Rica. It is in the eastern part of the country along the Caribbean Sea. The provincial capital is the city of Puerto Limón.

The Limón province borders the provinces of Heredia, Cartago and San José to the west, and Puntarenas province to the southwest. Nicaragua is to the north of the province, Panama to the south and the Caribbean Sea to the east.

Limón is the fourth largest province of Costa Rica, after the Puntarenas, Guanacaste and Alajuela provinces, with an area of . It has of the area of Costa Rica.

Most of territory of the province is flat land of low altitude but in the southwest is the "Cordillera de Talamanca" ("Talamaca mountain range") with the highest mountain of the country, the Cerro Chirripó, with an altitude of above sea level.

The main river of the province is the "Reventazón", the second longest river of the country after the Térraba; it is long.

Unlike the rest of Costa Rica, Limón has no dry-wet seasons. It rains all the year. The driest months are in September and October. The Köppen climate classification type for the climate at Puerto Limón is a "Tropical Rainforest Climate" and of the subtype "Af".

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Puerto Limón is . The month with the most precipitation on average is July with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is September with an average of .

The average temperature for the year in Puerto Limón is . The warmest month, on average, is May with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of 

The people of the province are known as "Limonenses", both men and women.

The Limón province had a population, in 2011, of 386,862, of the population of the country. Its population density was inhabitants/km. The canton of Pococí, with 125,962 inhabitants, is the canton with more inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Limón

The Limón province is divided in 6 cantons, which are divided into 29 Districts.

The main economic activity in the province is farming, with plantations of banana, pineapple, cacao, pejibaye and other tropical crops.

In the province is the port of Moín, the most important in the country.


