Walmart

Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. (), doing business as Walmart, is an American multinational retailing corporation that operates as a chain of hypermarkets, discount department stores, and grocery stores. Headquartered in Bentonville, Arkansas, the company was founded by Sam Walton in 1962 and incorporated on October 31, 1969. , Walmart has 11,695 stores and clubs in 28countries, under a total of 63banners. The company operates under the name Walmart in the United States and Canada. It operates as Walmart de México y Centroamérica in Mexico and Central America, as Asda in the United Kingdom, as the Seiyu Group in Japan, and as Best Price in India. It has wholly owned operations in Argentina, Chile, Brazil, and Canada. It also owns and operates the Sam's Club retail warehouses.

Walmart is the world's largest company by revenue – approximately $480 billion according to the Fortune Global 500 list in 2016 – as well as the largest private employer in the world with 2.3million employees. It is a family-owned business, as the company is controlled by the Walton family. Sam Walton's heirs own over 50percent of Walmart through their holding company, Walton Enterprises, and through their individual holdings. Walmart is also one of the world's most valuable companies by market value, and is also the largest grocery retailer in the U.S. In 2016, 62.3percent of Walmart's sales came from its U.S. operations.

The company was listed on the New York Stock Exchange in 1972. By 1988, Walmart was the most profitable retailer in the U.S., and by October 1989, it had become the largest in terms of revenue. Geographically limited to the South and lower Midwest up to the mid-1980s, by the early-1990s, the company's presence spanned from coast to coastSam's Club opened in New Jersey in November 1989 and the first California outlet opened in Lancaster in July 1990. A Walmart in York, Pennsylvania opened in October 1990, bringing the main store to the Northeast.

Walmart's investments outside North America have seen mixed results: its operations in the United Kingdom, South America, and China are highly successful, whereas ventures in Germany and South Korea failed.

Walmart () is a company founded by Sam Walton in 1962. It is one of the world's largest companies, behind Exxon Mobil. Wal-Mart stores are large department stores that sell many different things. There are more than 8,000 Wal-Mart stores around the world, and over 2 million people work for Wal-Mart. 

Walmart can be found in a lot of places around the world. It is mostly found around the United States but can also be found in Canada, Mexico, United Kingdom, some Asian countries, some African countries and some South American countries. Walmart has not yet reached Oceania.

Walmart is criticized for having a poor record on labor rights, especially regarding anti-union activity. It has also been criticized for once promoting "made in America" for its products but now largely importing the products it sells, from developing nations. Many of these jobs replaced manufacturing jobs in the U.S. along with the fact that Walmart retail jobs replaced many "mom and pop" stores in the U.S. In 2005, movie director Robert Greenwald made a documentary movie called "Wal-Mart: The High Cost of Low Price" that criticized Walmart. After this movie was announced, director Ron Galloway made a film that ended up being released at the same time called "Why Wal-Mart Works; and Why That Drives Some People C-R-A-Z-Y". This movie had a positive view of Walmart.


