Dayana Mendoza

Dayana Sabrina Mendoza Moncada (born June 1, 1986 in Caracas, Venezuela) is a model and beauty pageant titleholder. She won the titles of Miss Venezuela 2007, and Miss Universe 2008.

In 2001 Dayana signed with Elite modeling agency and paraded in Spain, Italy, France, USA, England, Greece and Germany for Versace, Roberto Cavalli and other designers.

She also participated in the fifth season of "The Celebrity Apprentice" (corresponding to the season twelve of "The Apprentice"), a program hosted by Donald Trump.

She was the representative of Amazonas state in the Miss Venezuela 2007. She earned the band Miss Integral and was crowned on September 13, 2007 as quincuagésimaquinta (55th) Miss Venezuela. She was the second Miss Venezuela to win representing Amazonas state.

On July 14, 2008, Dayana won the title Miss Universe 2008 during the pageant held in Nha Trang, Vietnam. With the victory, Venezuela equaled in second place in Puerto Rico in the number of crowns obtained as a country.

After photos of Mendoza modeling naked for a jewelry firm surfaced, officials from the Miss Universe Organization decided against penalizing her, saying that the candid photos were not pornographic but "artistic in nature, and they don't have an ounce of pornographic content to them."

On 27 March 2009, Mendoza documented a visit to Guantanamo Bay detention camp on her blog. In it, she was quoted as saying, "Guantanamo was such a relaxing place, so calm and beautiful". She also stated that when she visited the detainees camps, "...we saw the jails, where they shower, how the recreate themselves with movies, classes of art, books. It was very interesting". In her home country, Venezuela, the issue became the talk of the town, with the president, Hugo Chávez, reconsidering the praise he had previously given her. The Miss Universe Organization has replied that "...[her] comments on her blog were in reference to the hospitality she received while meeting the members of the U.S. military and their families who are stationed in Guantánamo". On 1 April 2009, the entry vanished from her blog.



