Code Geass

Code Geass: Lelouch of the Rebellion (コードギアス 反逆のルルーシュ, Kōdo Giasu: Hangyaku no Rurūshu?), often called simply Code Geass, is a 2006 Japanese animeseries. It was created by Sunrise. The series was directed by Gorō Taniguchi and written by Ichirō Ōkouchi. The character designs were made by manga artist group Clamp. The series was broadcast from October 5, 2006 until July 28, 2007.

The main character, Lelouch vi Britannia, used to be a prince of the Holy Empire of Britannia. He is a genius strategist. He meets a female named CC (referred to as C2). She gives him the power of "geass", which works differently for each person. His power is to force a person to do whatever he tells them to do. The power only works once per person and he must look them in the eyes for it to work. He wants to destroy Britannia. His only childhood friend, Suzaku Kururugi, is the main person stopping him from doing this because he thinks that Britannia can be changed from the inside. Lelouch and Suzaku are at Japan. Britannia conquered Japan after Lelouch was disowned for disrespecting his father, the king. Britannia stripped Japan of its prestige and renamed it Area 11. Lelouch's goal is to destroy Britannia. Suzaku does not agree with how Lelouch plans to do this. Suzaku joins the Britannian army to change the country from the inside. They fight each other—Lelouch's brains versus Suzaku's fighting talent.

His real name is Lelouch vi Britannia. He is the eleventh prince of the empire of Britannia. His mother, Marianne vi Britannia was murdered when he was child. Then his younger sister Nunnally became blind and could not walk by herself. She needed a wheelchair. Therefore, he hated Britannia and decided to create the kind world where Nunnally can live safely. He obtained Geass from C.C. and leaded a group of terrorists he united as the Black Knights with his well-known identity as Zero towards his revenge against Britannia and to create a better world for Nunnally. He latter wields the Knightmare Gawain with C.C. and Shinkirō in R2.
He is the son of the former Japanese prime minister and friend of Lelouch in childhood before he joined the Britannian military hoping to change Britannia from the inside. He wields the Knightmare Lancelot. 
She gives Lelouch the power of Geass.She is immortal because she bears the code.
She is half Japanese and half Britannian. She is the pilot of the Knightmare Guren Mk-II. She is an important member of the Black Knights.

Official "Code Geass" website


