Vowel

A vowel is a speech sound made by the vocal folds (commonly called the vocal cords). It is also a type of letter in the alphabet.

The letters of the English alphabet are either vowels or consonants or both. A vowel sound comes from the lungs, through the vocal cords, and is not blocked, so there is no friction. All English words have vowels.

These letters are vowels in English:

The letter Y can be a vowel (as in the words "cry", "sky", "fly" or "why"), or it can be a consonant (as in "yellow", "yacht", "yam" or "yesterday").

These five or six letters stand for about 20 vowel sounds in most English accents. This important fact helps to explain why pronunciation can be difficult for both native speakers and learners of English.


There are a few different kinds of vowels. Simple vowels are called monophthongs, since you only need to place your tongue and mouth in one place. The words in the parentheses are the IPA symbols for each vowel sound.

Common monophthongs in English (these are for General American English) include:
More complicated vowels include diphthongs, complex vowels in which your mouth and/or tongue move as you say them.

Common diphthongs in English include:
Since there are many accents in English, this list does not list all the sounds of English, mostly just those of American English. Some of the sounds listed above are a little different in different accents. For example, while most British accents can say and understand the difference between /ɑ/ and /ɔ/, many American accents cannot tell difference between the two sounds and usually pronounce them the same way. This is called the Cot-Caught Merger.

Since there is such a difference between vowel sounds even among accents and dialects of English, alongside such a small number of letters to represent a large number of sounds, the difference between the dialects and accents of English would also make spelling reform very difficult, since there is no one central authority that decides how English should be written (since both Britain and America have a major influence on how English is written) and since people would have their own ideas on how to spell words.



