Ice Age: Continental Drift

Ice Age: Continental Drift (also known as Ice Age 4: Continental Drift or simply as Ice Age 4) is a 2012 American 3D computer animated adventure and comedy movie. It was directed by Steve Martino and Mike Thurmeier. It was written by Jason Fuchs and Michael Berg. It stars the voices of Ray Romano, John Leguizamo, Denis Leary, Queen Latifah, Seann William Scott, Josh Peck, Jennifer Lopez, Keke Palmer, Peter Dinklage, Wanda Sykes, Drake and Nicki Minaj.

It is the fourth "Ice Age" series. It was produced by Blue Sky Studios. It was distributed by 20th Century Fox. It is also the first sequel of "Ice Age" not to be directed by Carlos Saldanha. It was the second "Ice Age" movie that is in Digital 3D. It was released in the United States on July 13, 2012. This was the first "Ice Age" movie to be shot in the 2.39:1 aspect ratio.

The movie was given mixed reviews from movie critics. The movie became a box office hit. It is currently the 6th highest-grossing animated movie in history. It is the 3rd highest-grossing movie of 2012 with a worldwide gross of over USD$800 million. "Ice Age: Continental Drift" was released on DVD, Blu-ray and Blu-ray 3D on December 4, 2012.

News of another "Ice Age" sequel were announced on January 10, 2010. "The New York Times" reported that Blue Sky was working on a fourth movie. They were also developing plans on who would be voice acting in the movie. Fox later confirmed this on May 5, 2010. They released the title as "Ice Age: Continental Drift". They said it will be released on July 13, 2012.


Non-speaking characters include:

Jeremy Renner was supposed to be the voice actor of Captain Gutt. He later dropped out because of scheduling conflicts with "The Bourne Legacy". Jennette McCurdy was originally set to voice Peaches, but dropped out because of her schedule on "iCarly".

"Ice Age: Continental Drift" is the soundtrack of the movie scored by John Powell and was released on July 10, 2012.

"Ice Age Village" is a mobile video game. It was developed by Gameloft, and was released on April 5, 2012 to iPhone, iPad and various Android devices.

"Ice Age: Continental Drift – Arctic Games", a video game based on the movie, was published by Activision Publishing. It was developed by Behaviour Interactive and was released on July 10, 2012, on Wii, Nintendo 3DS, Nintendo DS, and Kinect for Xbox 360.

A sequel, titled "Ice Age: Collision Course", was released on July 22, 2016.



