Chaka Khan

Yvette Marie Stevens (better known as Chaka Khan and born March 23, 1953 near Chicago) is a ten time Grammy Award winning American singer and songwriter. She first became famous in the 1970s as the main singer for the funk group Rufus. Khan went solo around 1978, and her hit songs include "I Feel for You" "I'm Every Woman", "Sweet Thing" and "Through the Fire". She also got several nominations for American Music Awards.

On May 19, 2011, Khan was given the 2,440th Hollywood Walk of Fame star plaque on a section of Hollywood Boulevard in Los Angeles.

Khan has been married twice and is the mother of two children, daughter Indira Milini and son Damien Holland. Khan's first marriage was to Hassan Khan, in 1970, when she was 17. They divorced a short time later. Milini's birth was the result of a relationship between Khan and Rahsaan Morris. Khan married her second husband, Richard Holland, in 1976. The marriage reportedly caused a rift between Khan and several members of Rufus. Khan dated a Chicago-area schoolteacher in the mid-1980s in the middle of her solo stardom. Following their separation, Khan moved to Europe. She first lived in London, later living in Germany. 

In the past, Khan struggled with drug abuse and alcoholism. Her drug use, which at times included cocaine and heroin, ended sometime in the early 1990s. Khan would have an on-again, off-again struggle with alcoholism. In 2005 she said she was sober. In 2006, her son Damien Holland was accused of murder after 17-year-old Christopher Bailey was shot to death. Khan testified on her son's behalf defending her son's innocence. Holland said the shooting was an accident and was found not guilty. Though she sang at both the 2000 Democratic and Republican conventions, Khan says that she is more of a "Democratic-minded person".

In December 2011, Khan won permanent custody of her granddaughter, Daija Jade Holland. Khan said the mother was unable to raise her due to her drug addiction. It was reported that Khan's son was also addicted to drugs.

To date, Chaka Khan has won 10 Grammy Awards, including two as a member of Rufus. She has received 22 Grammy Award nominations, including three as a member of Rufus.


To date, she has had four American Music Award nominations.
References:



