Independence Day of Bangladesh

The Independence Day of Bangladesh on 26 March is a national holiday. It is for the country's declaration of independence from Pakistan. On the night of 25th March 1971, Pakistani Army brutally committed genocide on unarmed civilian Bengalis in the name of "Operation Searchlight". On the 26th of March, Bangladesh's independence from Pakistan was declared by Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman and the nine month long bloody liberation war was commenced. The day is a memorial to the deaths of millions of civilians and valiant freedom fighters who died in the Bangladesh Liberation War.On Independence Day there are parades, political speeches, fairs, concerts, and ceremonies. TV and radio stations broadcast special programs and patriotic songs. Generally a thirty one gun salute is done in the morning. The main streets are decorated with national flags. We observe the day with due respect. All the people of Bangladesh eagerly wait for this day.The day has great importance to the people of Bangladesh. Bangladesh is a country of solemnity and unity. On the occasion of Independence Day the whole country wears festive colors. All the govt. offices are decorated with colourful lightings.

Background: Bangladesh is a newborn independent country. We had to undergo a world of pains and sufferings under the barbaric domination of the different autorotation of Great Britain as colonial state for long 190 years. Then we had to suffer under the domination of the barbarize rulers of West Pakistan for about 25 years. A mountain high disparity was created by them in the different spheres of national life. They made us crippled economically, politically and culturally. Their atrocities surpassed all the humanitarian limits. But our undaunted leaders and freedom-loving people did not let the matter go unchallenged. They rose up with great determination and started vigorous movement against them. A lot of blood was shed in different movements. At last, the war of liberation was waged on the midnight of March 25 1971. The war continued for long nine months. More than 30 lacks of people sacrificed their valuable lives for the cause of freedom. This blood-shed of our heroic people did not go in vain. A proverb also goes, ‘there is a silver lining even in the darkest of clouds’. Justice triumphed in the long run. The Pakistani occupation forces surrendered unconditionally to the allied forces on December 16, 1971. This victory confirmed the birth of Bangladesh on the world map. However, March 26 victory confirmed the birth of Bangladesh on the world map. However, March 26 is our independence day because on this day in 1971, the Independence Day was declared. We celebrate this day every year with great honor and solemnity.

Day’s programme: the day’s programme begins with the dawn of the day. The national flag is hoisted on all government and private buildings in towns. Dhaka, our capital city, takes a festive look on this occasion. Various units of our armed forces exhibit parades before the spectators. Sweets are distributed among the children. Special prayers are offered for the martyrs in all mosques, temples and churches of the country. Shaheed families are paid honor and respect. Special foods are supplied in hospitals and prisons. Essay writing competitions stressing on the significance of the day are held.

Various social and cultural organizations hold functions to commemorate the day. Sports and games are held throughout the country. The roads of the town remain crowded with the people of all walks of life. Government and semi-government offices, educational institutions and shops on both sides of the roads are decorated beautifully. In the evening, important government and public buildings are illuminated with mulch-colored bulbs. Radio and television center air special programmes. National dailies bring out special supplements highlighting the importance of the day. Flowers and floral wreaths are placed at the Jatiyo Smriti Soudho and . And songs are sung in chorus in honor of the martyrs

Significance of the day: it is needless to speak of the significance of the Independence Day in our life. Freedom is the birth right of man. No one has any right to snatch away this right. Despite the fact, we had to suffer deadly for lack of freedom for a pretty long time and live quite a sub-human life. We had land but we had no native land. We had language but we had no voice. Speak the truth, we were treated just life the inanimate objects of the earth. So we had no other alternative than to stand upright for the cause of our existence. We shattered the shackles of slavery and won independence in 1971. So the achievement of independence is a milestone in the life of the bangles. It is not merely a date of yearly calendar. It is a day of great thrill. It, is a day of great sensation. It is a day of great victory – a victory of justice over injustice, a victory of truth over falsehood, a victory of light over darkness, a victory of freedom over slavery and a victory of humanity over inhumanity. It is a day of taking on oath of dedicating life for the cause of motherland. It is a day of learning the great lessons that the will of people prevails, for man is born to be free and that the weapons of freedom needn’t be very big and that the oppressors will always be defeated and that eternal vigilance is the price of liberty.

Conclusion: the Independence Day is day of great joy and merriment to us all. The day is observed every year with great festivities across the country. We pledge our love and toil to our beloved motherland:


