Bermuda triangle

The Bermuda Triangle, sometimes called the Devil's Triangle, is an area in the western part of the North Atlantic Ocean. 

Some people think this is because of paranormal or extraterrestrial beings. Many of the incidents were false. Some people believe that insurance companies charge higher premiums for shipping in this area, but that is not true.- 

Aircraft. On December 5, 1945 a US Navy flight of five Torpedo Bombers on a navigation exercise became lost; likewise a PBM patrol plane on the search for the missing aircraft was lost due to an explosion of unknown cause..

Ships. According to Legend a sailing ship the "Ellen Austin" found a derelict vessel and placed a crew to sail the vessel to port. Two versions of what happened to the vessel are: the vessel was either lost in a storm or was found again without a crew. Lawrence David Kusche author of "The Bermuda Triangle Mystery-Solved" found no mention in 1880 or 1881 newspapers of this alleged incident-he did trace the legend to a book by Rupert Gould "The Stargazer Talks" published in 1943. The "Ellen Austin" did exist; although one website includes the alleged derelict vessel incident it does find that Rupert Gould talked about the legend on radio in the 1930s; likewise the website traces the derelict story to a June 1906 newspaper story-which claims the derelict ship incident took place in 1891-however the 1906 story does not give a reference of where this story came from!

According to Legend a U.S. Navy collier USS Cyclops {AC-4} was lost without trace in March 1918 with about the loss of 306 persons. Circumstantial evidence uncovered by two separate researchers is that the missing ship was lost due to a storm March 10, 1918. The first appeared in "Popular Science" June 1929 article by Alfred P. Reck "Strangest American Sea Mystery is Solved at Last" ; nearly 50 years later Lawrence David Kusche author of "The Bermuda Triangle Mystery Solved" found a report that a navy diver may have accidently found the missing vessel off Cape Charles Virginia in 1968 and also evidence of the storm of March 9/10, 1918.



