Bella Thorne

Annabella Avery "Bella" Thorne (born October 8, 1997) is an American actress, dancer, singer, and model. She started as a child model and actress who has appeared in more than 20 movies and television series and more than 60 commercials. She is best known for her role as the young dancer CeCe Jones on the Disney Channel series "Shake It Up!".

Bella Thorne was born on October 8, 1997 in Pembroke Pines, Florida. She is the youngest of four children. Her older siblings are Kaili (born in 1992), Dani (born in 1993), and Remy (born in 1995), who are also actors and models. When Thorne was growing up, Spanish was her first language, but she has forgotten it from not using it.

Thorne's first movie appearance was as a sidelines fan in the 2003 movie "Stuck on You", but she was not credited for it. Since then, she has appeared in movie and television projects including "Jimmy Kimmel Live!", "Entourage", "The O.C." (as a younger version of Taylor Townsend), the third-last episode of "October Road", and five episodes of "Dirty Sexy Money" (as Margaux Darling). In 2007, Thorne appeared as a young girl who saw visions in "The Seer".

In 2008, Thorne starred alongside Christian Slater and Taylor Lautner in the drama series "My Own Worst Enemy". She won a Young Artist's Award for her portrayal of the character Ruthy Spivey in this series. She then appeared in the ten-episode web series "Little Monk", which showed characters from the series "Monk" as children. In 2009, she played the antagonist in the horror movie "Forget Me Not".

In 2010, Thorne joined the cast of HBO's "Big Love" in its fourth season. She replaced Jolean Wejbe in the role of Bill Henrickson's daughter Tancy 'Teeny' Henrickson, even though she had actually auditioned for a different role. She also guest starred on "Wizards of Waverly Place", as Max's girlfriend Nancy Lukey. Thorne also took on a supporting role in the family drama "Raspberry Magic".

Thorne was also a child model. Since appearing in her first picture for a parenting magazine at the age of 6 weeks, Thorne has starred in television ad campaigns for Digital Light Processing, Publix, and KFC, and appeared in print ads for brands including Barbie, ALDO K!DS, JLO by Jennifer Lopez, Kaiya Eve Couture, LaSenza Girl, Tommy Hilfiger, Ralph Lauren, Guess?, Target, Justice and Mudd for Kohls. She also modelled for Sears Back to School. In an interview with Seventeen magazine, Thorne said that her appointment as the spokesperson for Texas Instruments was her big break. She also said that she has lost much more projects than she has booked and said that the support of her family helped her get over disappointments.

Thorne currently co-stars on the Disney Channel sitcom "Shake It Up!", (originally titled "Dance, Dance Chicago"). Thorne plays Cecelia "CeCe" Jones, a dancer who dreams of a career in the spotlight. While she had done a lot of work in television and movie, Thorne had no experience in professional dancing before being cast in this show. After signing onto the show in October 2009, she began taking three dance classes every night.

Thorne is from Pembroke Pines, Florida, but has been living with her family in California since early 2006. Her interests include dancing, playing soccer, spending time with her family and playing with her two dogs, six cats and a turtle. She also says that she collects hardcover books, listens to 80s music, and uses YouTube as a research tool for getting into character. Thorne is a strong supporter of the Humane Society, the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, and The Nomad Organization, which provides education, food and medical supplies to children in Africa.

Thorne lost her father to a vehicle accident in 2007.

Thorne was diagnosed with dyslexia in second grade. She is currently being home-schooled. She used to go to a public school, but was abused by other students. Thorne improved in her learning after attending a Sylvan Learning center and is currently reading and writing a grade ahead. Thorne also talked about her dyslexia in an April 2010 interview with American Cheerleader Magazine, and explained that she overcame her dyslexia by reading everything she could find, including the labels of cereal boxes.

Thorne is currently dating YouTuber Sam Pepper. In August 2016, Thorne came out as bisexual.



