The Pursuit of Happyness

The Pursuit of Happyness is a 2006 American drama movie. It was written about Chris Gardner's struggles of being a homeless man.


Will Smith

is an American actor; he is also a hip-hop artist. He won the Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations; he also won a number of Grammy Awards in music. He is one of the few successes in three major entertainment media - film, television and music at the same time the artist.

Jaden Smith

was born on July 8, 1998 in the United States of Los Angeles, California. He is the son of Will Smith. In 2006, he and his father together in the "pursuit of happyness", his good performance made him the rare child star. He has a bright future

The movie’s main character--Chris Gardner is a good husband, a good father. His wife left him because their life is too hard. Gardner brought up his son only by himself. He wants to change his life for himself and for the person who loves him. When he tries to get the job, he has no pay so he goes to work and sell his “Bone mineral density treatment instrument” at the same time. Everyday, he brings his son to go to the church to find a place to live. He just does the same thing everyday and at last, he is successful. 
He is just such a person. He is hopeful, kind. If he wants to do something, he must keep fighting until he gets the thing he wants. He has his dream and his son to support him. His son told to him:” you are a good papa.” This sentence instead of everything!

This movie is based on a true story about a man named Chris Gardner. Gardner has invested in a device called "Bone Density scanner". He feels like that he can achieve success from it. However, they do not sell as they are marginally better than the current technology at a much higher price. On top of that, one of these does not work. As Gardner tries to figure out on how to fix the faulty one and sell the others, his wife leaves him, he loses his house, his bank account, and credit cards. Forced to live out in the streets with his son, Gardner is now desperate to find a steady job. He is good at math and interpersonal relation. With his persistence and Jay Twistle’s help, he takes on a job as a stockbroker, but before he can receive pay, he needs to go through 6 months of training, and to sell his devices. In these 6 months, Gardner learns about the stockbroker all the time. He reads books in the dim light in the evening, on the underground, on the street. Besides learning, he has to find shelters for him and his son every afternoon. One day, they don’t find a shelter, they stay in a toilet at a subway station. Everything comes to him who waits. He beats the other 20 people and takes the job. Later he sets up his own corporation.

The soundtrack of the movie was released on January 9, 2007.



