Universal Orlando Resort

Universal Orlando Resort is a resort in Orlando, Florida. It is in a partnership between NBC Universal and The Blackstone Group. The resort consists of two theme parks (Universal Studios Florida and Islands of Adventure), CityWalk (a nighttime entertainment destination), and three Loews hotels. CityWalk includes the 20 screen Loews Universal Cineplex, a lot of restaurants, shops, and clubs. There are eight restaurants, five entertainment areas and 11 shopping stores.

Universal Studios Florida is one of the themes parks in Universal Orlando Resort. It includes rides and many shows.



Islands of Adventure is a theme park in Orlando, Florida. It opened in 1999 as an expansion to the Universal Orlando Resort and CityWalk areas. The park has six "islands", each having its own theme.

The Port of Entry is the area north of the entrance, positioned at the southernmost point of the park. It is primarily a shopping center, and has the feel of an Arabian bazaar. Its main feature is the Confisco Grille, a restaurant. Located next to the Port of Entry, Marvel Super Hero Island has rides similar to Marvel comic books. Its four rides are the Incredible Hulk Coaster, the only launched Bolliger and Mabillard roller coaster, The Amazing Adventures of Spider-Man, a simulator ride set in New York, Doctor Doom's Fearfall, a vertically launched ride similar to Power Tower at Cedar Point in Ohio, and Storm Force Accelatron which is a faster version of the traditional Teacup ride.

Toon Lagoon contains mostly water rides and is themed after the cartoons found in the Sunday newspaper. These rides include Popeye & Bluto's Bilge Rat Barges, a whitewater rapids ride, and Dudley Do-Right's Rip Saw Falls, a log flume with a 50 foot drop. Also here is Me Ship, The Olive, a kids play area. The Comic Strip Cafe and Wimpy's provide food here.
Set in the time of Jurassic Park the movie, the only ride is Jurassic Park River Adventure. The Lost Continent has a theme of a lost medieval city. Dueling Dragons is an inverted roller coaster with two different tracks, Fire and Ice. Poseidon's Fury is a special effects show where you can explore Poseidon's underground tomb. Close by is The Eighth Voyage of Sindbad, a live action stunt show. Outside the entrance to this show is the mystical Talking Fountain which talks to, and soaks people who goes by it. Also in the Lost Continent is the Flying Unicorn, a roller coaster for children and The Enchanted Oak Tavern. Mythos is a casual sit-down restaurant at the entrance to the Continent.

Seuss Landing is the only zone at Islands of Adventure for small children. It is based on the works of the author Dr. Seuss. It has several Seuss-themed rides including the Caro-Seuss-el, The Cat in the Hat Ride, and If I Ran the Zoo. It also features One Fish, Two Fish, Red Fish, Blue Fish and the Green Eggs and Ham Cafe.

When the park opened, a boat ride, Island Skipper Tours, took park guests around the central lagoon of Islands of Adventure. It had stops in Port of Entry across from the Confisco Grille restaurant, and in Jurassic Park next to the Discovery Center. The ride was closed in 2002.

Originally Toon Lagoon featured a live show with cartoon characters. It was replaced in 2002 by a Dave Mirra-themed BMX stunt show. There used to be a Triceratops Encounter in Jurassic Park that featured a lifelike animatronic dinosaur.

A ride that was supposed to open with the park in Seuss Landing was Sylvester McMonkey McBean's Incredible Driving Machines. This was similar to Pteranodon Flyers in Jurassic Park in that parents and children could ride together in cars that ran on an elevated track that toured Seuss Landing. They were never able to get the ride to work, and the supplier that made most of the components went bankrupt in 1999. The ride never opened, but the tracks are still at the park.



