Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked

Alvin and the Chipmunks: Chipwrecked is a 2011 movie starring Jason Lee as David Seville. The main characters for the movie are Alvin, Simon, Theodore and the Chipettes. The movie was released on December 16, 2011.
Dave Seville (Jason Lee), the chipmunks, and the chipettes are on a cruise with Dave for a family vacation. Dave discovers that his old boss, Ian Hawke (David Cross) is working as a pelican on the Cruise. Dave warns Alvin to not have too much fun but Alvin does not listen and him and the other chipmunks get blown away while holding onto a kite and they end up stranded on a deserted island. Dave tries to take a hanglider to find the chipmunks but after Ian tries to stop him and they both end up in the ocean.

On the island, the chipmunks try to find food and they meet a castaway, Zoe (Jenny Slate). She shows the chipmunks her hut she built with a zip line. Eleanor sprains her ankle after falling from the zip line and Simon gets bitten by a spider. This gives him a neurotoxin disease making him believe he is a French explorer named "Simone." Simone asks Jeanette to dance, thinking she is beautiful, much to Alvin's dismay. Zoe takes Simone, Jeanette, Eleanor and Theodore to a waterfall and Simone finds a cave full of gold and jewellery.

The next day, Alvin and Brittnay notice the volcano on the island is active and decide they had better leave the island after Dave and Ian arrive at the island. They begin to build a raft to escape the island. Simone and Jeanette are still looking for food. Zoe knocks Simone out with a golf ball, and captures Jeanette. She forces her to give her all the gold, by tying Jeanette to a rope and putting her down into the cave. Even though Jeanette refuses, Zoe still makes her.

Later, Simon wakes up as his normal self and cannot remember anything after the spider bite. When the others cross a tree log to find Jeanette but when the ground begins to rumble, Zoe lets go of the rope. Jeanette follows Dave and Alvin back but gets caught by Zoe who still forces Jeanette to give her the gold. Simon saves Jeanette from Zoe. Alvin cuts the rope, releasing Zoe's grip and as the log begins to crack, Dave hangs on and Ian finally convinces Zoe to help save Dave.

They escape the island on the raft just as the volcano erupts and later are rescued by a rescue helicopter, Jeanette gives Zoe a bracelet that Simone gave her as a present. Alvin and Dave reconcile.

The chipmunks and chipettes perform at the International Music Awards and Ian gets his job back by selling Zoe's story to Hollywood.

In the epilogue on the flight home, Alvin speaks on the pilot's microphone that the plane is heading for Timbuktu. The flight attendant says the flight will leave now and Alvin accidentally pushes the food cart and it hits Dave and Dave yells "ALLLLVINNN!!"



