Nintendo Land

Nintendo Land is a 2012 party video game developed and published by Nintendo for the Wii U video game console. It was announced during E3 2012.

"Nintendo Land" has twelve mini-games that are playable in it, based off of famous Nintendo franchises like "The Legend of Zelda", "Mario" and "Metroid". Each minigame is styled like a theme park attraction. Each minigame is supposed to show off how the Wii U GamePad works, and they all use some of its abilities, such as motion controls and the touch screen. "Nintendo Land" also supports the Wii Remote controller. The game tries to have 'asymmetric gameplay', which means to have a different experience depending on what controller you use.

The game was mostly liked by reviewers, and sold five million copies.

"Nintendo Land" takes place in a theme park, which also serves as the game's hub for its twelve minigames. A robot named Monita acts as a guide throughout the game, and teaches the player the basics of the game. Finishing minigames will earn the player coins, which can be used to play a pachinko game. If the player wins the pachinko game, they get a prize of a building from one of the minigames that they can decorate the theme park with.

Number of players: 1–5
This minigame is based on the "The Legend of Zelda" series. Players using the Wii Remote wield a sword to fight enemies with. The player using the Wii U GamePad has a bow, and they must shoot the bow at enemies. The GamePad player can also spy on enemies by lifting the GamePad, or reload their arrows by facing the GamePad down.

Metroid Blast

This minigame is based on the "Metroid" series. Players using the Wii Remote and Nunchuk battle on the ground and players using the Wii U GamePad battle in Samus Aran's gunship. There are three game modes in this minigame. There is "Assault Mission", where the player must pass each level, "Surface-Air Combat", where those on foot must kill the player in the air and "Ground Battle", where all players are on foot and have to collect tokens. "Metroid Blast" is based off of a Nintendo tech demo from E3 2011.


