Russian Ground Forces

The Russian Ground Forces (Russian: Сухопутные войска Российской Федерации) are the land forces of the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation, formed after the break up of the Soviet Union. Since 1992, the Russian troops have withdrawn from many Soviet posts, but the branch has been determined to the Chechen Wars, peace keeping, and other operations in the post-Soviet states.

The President of Russia Dmitry Medvedev is the supreme commander-in-chief of the Russian Ground Forces. The headquarters is located in Moscow.

The branches of service is made up of the rifle troops, tank troops, artillery and rocket forces, troop air defense, special corp, etc. The rifle troops (Motorised Rifle Troops) are the main part of the Russian Ground Forces. The branch controls all the battle formations. The branch also has all the destructive weapons for defense against land and aerial forces. The tank troops are an important branch in the Russian Ground Forces that is responsible for the defense in important combat tasks. The artillery and rocket forces is a branch that has the most firepower for the Russian Ground Forces. The troops are defense is currently a branch under control by the Russian Air Force, but by 2015, the branch will be under control again by the Russian Ground Forces. Lastly, the special corp is a branch that takes care of the engineering, radioelectronic warfare, chemical and biological protection, radiation, technical support, etc.

The Russian Ground Forces are known to have a very large amount of equipment. A lot of this equipment is believed to be from the Soviet Union. Other countries seemed to get more modern equipment, while Russia was left with old Soviet equipment. Russia wanted to get more updated pieces, but the economy was not on the country's side.

Most of the ranks are very similar the Soviet Army's ranks. Most of the names of the ranks came from current German, French, English, Dutch and even Polish ranks. Very few changes have been made since the Soviet Union's breakup.

The Russian Ground Forces is known to have high crime rates for a military. The United States Foreign Military Studies Office (FMSO) said that the Russian Ground Forces is "an institution increasingly defined by the high levels of military criminality and corruption embedded within it at every level," which is basically saying that the Russian Ground Forces has high levels of crime and corruption placed in every level. Some crimes would include the stealing of weapons, assisting drug smugglers, high corruption and even claims of contract killings.


