Bradley Cooper

Bradley Charles Cooper (born January 5, 1975) is an American movie, theater, and television actor. He is best known for his roles in the movies; "The Hangover", "The A-Team", "Wedding Crashers", and "Limitless". Cooper has appeared in the 2012 movie "Hit and Run". In 2011, "People" magazine named Cooper "Sexiest Man Alive". 

Cooper was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. He grew up in nearby Jenkintown, Pennsylvania. His parents were Gloria (née Campano) and Charles J. Cooper. Cooper was raised Catholic. 

While attending Germantown Academy, Cooper worked at the "Philadelphia Daily News". After graduating from Germantown Academy in 1993, Cooper attended Villanova University for his first year, then transferred to Georgetown University.

Cooper began his career after a small guest role in an episode of "Sex and the City" in 1999. He starred in his first movie called "West Hot American Summer" in 2001.

Cooper then landed the role as Will Trippin the drama series "Alias". After leaving Alias in 2003, Cooper guest-starred on the short-lived TV series "Miss Match", and later returned twice to Alias to reprise his role in guest appearances.

Afterwards, Cooper began starring in small television movies for ABC Family. He starred in "I Want to Marry Ryan Banks". He then appeared in a television series called "Jack & Bobby".

In March 2006, Cooper starred in "Three Days of Rain" on Broadway with Julia Roberts and Paul Rudd at the Bernard B. Jacobs Theater.

Cooper appeared in Season 5 of "Nip/Tuck" as Aidan Stone, a television star on the fictional show "Hearts 'N Scalpels". In 2008, Cooper had roles in "Yes Man" with Jim Carrey and in "The Rocker" with Rainn Wilson. On February 7, 2009, Cooper hosted "Saturday Night Live".

In 2009, Cooper starred in the movies "He's Just Not That Into You", "Case 39", "All About Steve", and ""The Hangover". In 2012, he starred with Robert De Niro and Jennifer Lawrence in David O. Russell's "Silver Linings Playbook". 

In 2013, Cooper reprised his role as Phil Wenneck in the third and final installment of The Hangover trilogy, "The Hangover Part III". That year Cooper also appeared in "American Hustle" alongside Christian Bale, Amy Adams, Jeremy Renner, and Jennifer Lawrence. His performance earned him a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.

His latest movie is "Guardians of the Galaxy". He will provide the voice of Rocket Raccoon.

Cooper was married to Jennifer Esposito from December 2006 until they divorced in November 2007. He is Catholic.



