Frozen (2013 movie)

Frozen is an American computer animated musical fantasy-comedy movie. It is produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Pictures. It is loosely based on Hans Christian Andersen's fairy tale "The Snow Queen".

"Frozen" is about a princess named Anna, and her sister Elsa who becomes queen. There is also a funny talking snowman called Olaf. In the popular movie, Elsa sings a song called "Let It Go," which became very popular. "Frozen" was released on November 27, 2013 and has the voices of Kristen Bell and Idina Menzel in speaking and singing roles. 

"Frozen" got great reviews from movie critics. It was nominated for the Golden Globe for Best Animated Feature Film. A sequel for the movie is being made, "Frozen 2", and will be released on November 27, 2019.

Anna and Elsa are two princess sisters who live in Arendelle. Elsa, now queen of Arendelle, has the power of working with snow and ice, but her power gets out of control and upsets the people of Arendelle. Not wanting to hurt anyone, Elsa runs off and makes her own palace for herself. Meanwhile, Anna sets off in the snow and ice in order to bring Elsa back and make things right with her. On the way, she meets Kristoff, a friendly iceman, and Olaf, a funny snowman made alive by Elsa who dreams of seeing summer.

Hans wants to marry Anna, but he tells her he only wants to marry her to destroy Elsa and get royal powers. As Hans raises his sword over Elsa, Anna stops Hans and as a result turns to a frozen statue. Elsa weeps out of love for the frozen Anna, and this thaws Anna back to life. Seeing this, Olaf realizes that an act of true love is what thaws a frozen heart. With the power of love, Elsa stops the icy spell over Arendelle, and all of Arendelle live happily ever after, including Olaf, who is able to see summer with a snow flurry over his head so that the summer heat will not make him melt.


Plans to make the movie were started in the 1940's, but the writers were not sure how its story could go, and so the movie was never made. Later, in 2011, the writers finally found a story to use for the movie and the production team began making the movie. Original plans said the movie would be hand-drawn, but the team decided to use computer animation. It took only two years to make "Frozen", which was a very fast production time for a professional computer-animated movie. 

"Frozen" is also probably one of the most difficult animated movies to make. The animation team had to travel to a snowy area in Wyoming so that they could study the behavior of snow and simulate it with a computer. They also used a program that could generate a lot of strands for Elsa's hair. An average human has about 100,000 strands of hair, while Elsa's hair was made of 400,000 strands.

This is a list of songs heard in the movie "Frozen". These can be found on the movie's soundtrack CD. The CD also contains the background music pieces used for "Frozen". The songs were made by husband and wife Robert and Kristen Anderson-Lopez, while the movie's background music was made by Christophe Beck.


