Mariel Hemingway

Mariel Hemingway (b. November 22, 1961) is an American actress and writer. She starred in many television programs and in movies. She is the granddaughter of writer Ernest Hemingway.

Hemingway's first role was with her sister Margaux in the movie "Lipstick" (1976). The movie was not considered especially good, but Mariel received notice for her acting. She was nominated as "Best Newcomer" for the Golden Globes Award that year.

Hemingway's most famous role was in Woody Allen's "Manhattan". It was a romantic comedy in which she plays Tracy, a high school student and Allen's lover. She was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress.

In "Personal Best" (1982), she played a bisexual track and field athlete. The movie was noted for some explicit (by mainstream standards) lesbian love scenes. In connection with "Personal Best", she appeared in a pictorial in the April 1982 issue of "Playboy" and was also on the cover.

She starred as Dorothy Stratten in "Star 80" (1983), a movie about the "Playboy" model's life and murder. Reports circulated for years that Hemingway had had her breasts enlarged to play the role of Stratten. During a 2007 appearance on the late-night talk and variety show, "Fashionably Late with Stacy London", she said she had the surgery before "Star 80". Her breast implants were removed years later after they had ruptured.

Hemingway has played a lesbian or bisexual woman in several movies and television shows, including, "Personal Best", "The Sex Monster", "In Her Line of Fire", and episodes of the TV series "Roseanne" and "Crossing Jordan". Hemingway, however, is not gay. She has said she formed a "big connection with the gay-and-lesbian community" after "Personal Best" and enjoys taking roles in "cutting-edge" productions.

Hemingway has a perfume, "Mariel", by HO+.

She is the host of "Spiritual Cinema", a monthly television show dedicated to spiritual movies. She has begun hosting a series of yoga practice videos "Yoga Now", with guru Rodney Yee.

In December 2008, Hemingway said through her web site's blog that she had separated from her husband earlier in the year. Hemingway had been married since December 9, 1984 to Stephen Crisman. They had two daughters together: model Dree Hemingway (born 1987) and Langley Fox Hemingway (born 1989). As of early 2011, Hemingway is romantically involved with Bobby Williams.

Mariel Hemingway is the author of:


