Sundarbans National Park

The Sundarbans National Park is a National Park, tiger reserve, and a Biosphere Reserve in the Sundarbans delta. It is in the Indian state of West Bengal. This area is densely covered by mangrove forests. It is one of the largest reserves for the Bengal tiger. It is also home to a variety of bird, reptile and invertebrate species, including the salt-water crocodile. On May 4, 1984 it was made a National Park.

There are seven main rivers and many watercourses forming a network of channels at this delta. They all run southward towards the sea. The coastal area has many mudflats. They are the right environment for mangroves.

The mangrove vegetation of Sundarbans has 64 plant species. They can withstand estuarine conditions and large amounts of saline. In the month of April and May the flaming red leaves of the genwa ("Excoecaria agallocha") the crab-like red flowers of the kankra ("Bruguiera gymnorrhiza") and the yellow flowers of khalsi ("Aegiceras corniculatum") can be seen. Some of the other commonly found plants and trees in the park are dhundal (or cannonball mangrove, "Xylocarpus granatum"), passur ("Xylocarpus mekongensis"), garjan ("Rhizophora" spp.), sundari ("Heritiera fomes") and goran ("Ceriops decandra").

The Sundarbans forest is home to more than 400 tigers. The Royal Bengal Tigers have developed a unique characteristic of swimming in the saline waters. They are famous for their man-eating tendencies. Tigers can be seen on the river banks sunbathing between November and February.

Apart from the Bengal tiger there are also many fishing cats, leopard cats, macaques, wild boar, Indian grey mongoose, fox, jungle cat, flying fox, pangolin, chital.

Some of the birds commonly found in this region are red junglefowls, spot-billed pelicans, great egrets, cormorants, seagulls, common kingfishers, peregrine falcons, woodpeckers, northern pintails, and whistling teals.

Some of the fish and amphibians found in the park are Sawfish, Butter Fish, Electric rays, Silver carp, Star Fish, Common Carp, King Crabs, Prawn, Shrimps, Gangetic Dolphins, Skipping Frogs, Common Toads and Tree Frogs.

The Sundarbans National Park houses a large number of reptiles as well, including estuarine crocodiles, chameleons, monitor lizards, turtles, including Olive Ridley, hawksbill, and green turtles. Snakes include pythons, King Cobras, rat snakes, Russell's vipers, Dog Faced Water Snakes, Chequered Killbacks, and Common Kraits.

The endangered species that live in the Sundarbans are Royal Bengal Tiger, Saltwater Crocodile, River Terrapin, Olive Ridley Turtle, Gangetic dolphin, Ground Turtle, Hawks Bill Turtle and Mangrove horseshoe crab.

In 2001, Sunderban became a Biosphere Reserve. The ecosystem is recognized as part of UNESCO's Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme.




