Anne Neville

Anne Neville (11 June 1456 16 March 1485) was Princess of Wales as the wife of Edward of Westminster and was the queen of Richard III of England. She had just one son, Edward. She was the daughter of Richard Neville, 16th Earl of Warwick,

Anne was formally betrothed to Queen Margaret's son, Edward of Westminster at the Chateau d'Amboise in France. They were married in Angers Cathedral probably on 13 December 1470. Because of the death of Prince Edward at the Battle of Tewkesbury on 4 May 1471, she was taken prisoner along with Queen Margaret. She was taken first to Coventry and then to the Duke of Clarence's house in London. The Duke of Clarence was Richard's (the future King's) brother and married to Anne's sister Isabella. He wanted to keep all the Neville money and would not let her leave. Richard rescued Anne. They were married the next year.

The wedding of Anne Neville and Richard, Duke of Gloucester (later Richard III of England) took place on 12 July 1472, at Westminster Abbey. They lived in Middleham Castle. Upon her marriage, she was called Duchess of Gloucester. They had only one child, Edward, born at Middleham around 1473.

On 9 April 1483, Edward IV died. Richard was named Lord Protector for his 12-year-old nephew Edward V. On 25 June 1483, Edward was said to be illegitimate. Richard took the throne as King Richard III. Anne was crowned on 6 July 1483. Her son was made Prince of Wales.

Edward died suddenly on 9 April 1484, at Sheriff Hutton, while his parents were absent. He was then 10 years old. After the death of his son and heir, rumours said that Richard planned to divorce Anne and marry his niece, Elizabeth of York. There is little evidence for this. After the death of her son, Anne began to raise Richard's nephew, Edward, Earl of Warwick, the nine-year-old son of George of Clarence. Richard made the boy his heir. After Anne died, Richard quickly named another nephew, John de la Pole, Earl of Lincoln, as his heir.

Anne died on 16 March 1485 of tuberculosis, at Westminster.


