Mount Herzl

Mount Herzl (, ), also "Har HaZikaron" ( lit. "Mount of Remembrance"), is the national cemetery of Israel in Jerusalem. It is named for Theodor Herzl, the founder of modern political Zionism. Yad Vashem, the main Holocaust museum of Israel is on the Mount of Remembrance that is an extension of Mount Herzl. Mount Herzl is 834 meters above sea level. The Northern area is the National Military and Police cemetery and the Southern area is the National Civil Cemetery of the State of Israel.

The southern slope of Mount Herzl is dedicated to the leaders and important public persons of the state of Israel. In Hebrew this cemetery called: Helkat Gdolei Ha'Uma ("the section of the great people of the nation"). The cemetery region includes a national memorials of the Israeli public and memorial gardens of leaders that visit the state of Israel.

Mount Herzl Plaza is the main ceremonial plaza of the national cemetery. It is used for the Israel Independence Day ceremony every year. The plaza is at the highest spot on Mount Herzl.

The Menorah sculpture is at the entrance to Mount Herzl. It is dedicated to the Third Temple. It was made in 2002 by sculptor Ben Zion Tzefoni.

The Garden of the Nations is a public garden. It has been planted with olives trees by foreign leaders visiting Israel. Each tree is has a plaque with the name of the leader who planted it.

The Herzl Museum is a biographical museum. It tells the story of Theodor Herzl and his vision to create a Zionist country. The museum opened in 2005.

Mount Herzl Educational Center - The Stella and Alexander Margolis Educational Center for study of Zionism is located beside the Herzl Museum. It opened in 2013. A small memorial garden to Norman Herzl was planted beside the study center.

The memorial path was designed by the architect Uri Abramson and was built by Israeli youth organizations in 2003. It tells the story of the birth of the state of Israel, from the beginning of the Zionism until the declaration of the state. The path runs from the National Civil Cemetery to Yad Vashem.

The Victims of Acts of Terror Memorial is the main memorial for all victims of terrorism in Israel from 1851 until today. The Memorial was opened in 1997, and every year, a ceremony is held on the plaza of the memorial.

The main Israel Defense Forces cemetery is on the northern slope of Mt. Herzl. The cemetery includes memorials to members of the IDF who have fallen in the line of duty, and memorial gardens to the people who fought for the pre Zionist state. The Israel Police cemetery, for police officers who have fallen in the line of duty, is also located there.

The Garden of the Missing in Action is a Memorial Garden in the National Military and Police Cemetery dedicated to the Missing in action whose burial place is unknown. It is also dedicated to the memory of unknown soldiers. In the garden there is a wall of names that started in the year of 1914 until today. Beside it, empty graves represent missing soldiers and officers who have fought in the Israeli Defence Forces.

Israel plans to build a new national memorial hall at the entrance to the National Military and Police cemetery. The new hall will honour the memory of soldiers and security personnel died defending the land of Israel since 1860.  It will be built in the shape of a torch and include an eternal flame.

An ancient Jewish burial cave from the Second Temple period was found in the military cemetery in 1954. Architect Asher Hiram designed the entrance to the cave so that it is included in the cemetery.

The Mount of Remembrance is the western summit of Mount Herzl. It is 806 meters above sea level. It is called Mount of Remembrance in memory of the victims of the Holocaust. Yad Vashem museum is on the top of the mountain.

Yad Vashem is the national Holocaust museum of Israel. The museum includes the International School for Holocaust Studies, the International Institute for Holocaust Research, the Valley of the Destroyed Communities, the Hall of Names, and the Righteous Among the Nations memorial path.







