List of characters in the Camp Half-Blood series

This is a list of characters in the Percy Jackson & the Olympians and The Heroes of Olympus series.

Perseus "Percy" Jackson is a son of Poseidon and is the protagonist and narrator of the series. Being a child of one of the "Big Three" (Zeus, Hades, Poseidon), Percy is the hero referred to within the prophecy of the Oracle, which foretells that the next half-blood child of the "Big Three" to reach the age of sixteen would have to make a decision that would mean the destruction or saving of Olympus.

Annabeth Chase is a daughter of Athena. So, she is very intelligent. She is fascinated with architecture. In battle, she is a skilled enough fighter to fight along with Percy. She is very good in strategy. She ran away from home when she was seven and met Luke and Thalia, who took her with them to get to Camp Half-Blood. She aids Percy in four of his five quests and is captured in one of them.
Percy's girlfriend.

Grover Underwood is a satyr and Percy Jackson's best friend. He has found the four most powerful demigods of the century: Percy Jackson (son of Poseidon), Thalia Grace (daughter of Zeus), and Nico and Bianca di Angelo (children of Hades). Before his death, Pan (the god of nature) says Grover is the bravest satyr ever to be. He names Grover as his successor to carry on his word to protect the wilderness. The Council of Cloven Elders is angered by this choice. He is the boyfriend of the tree nymph Juniper. But in "The Last Olympian" he is chosen as a replacement for Leneus (another Satyr who died in battle) on The Council of Cloven Elders after.

Tyson is a Cyclops, the son of Poseidon and his mother is unknown. Technically he is not a demigod, but at camp he lives in Percy's cabin, and is considered to be Percy's brother. He first appears in "The Sea of Monsters" as a homeless boy. He is afraid of Grover while Grover is also afraid of him. Also in "The Sea of Monsters" he was Percy's best friend and was always picked on. At the end of the book, he gets to go to work for his father, Poseidon, in the Underwater Armory.

Nico di Angelo is a son of Hades, Bianca's younger brother and Hazel Levesque half-brother and Percy Jackson and Thalia and Jason Grace's cousin. At first Percy assumed Hades broke the oath not to have children after World War II, but Nico and his sister Bianca had been placed in the Lotus Casino, where 'time stands still' since before the oath was made. At the time, he took great interest in a game called Mythomagic. Nico has the power to raise skeletal warriors, shadow travel, and create great fissures in the ground that swallow up anyone or anything unfortunate enough to be standing on it at the time. For a time, he was Percy's enemy, blaming him for the fact that he had failed to protect Bianca as he had promised, but they became friends eventually. Nico tried multiple times to contact his sister and had difficulty contacting her, even using his dreams. Nico refused to stay at Camp Half-Blood in the fourth book after noting that he was not welcomed at Camp Half-Blood; he compares this to the fact that his father is not welcomed at Olympus. Several months later, he informed Percy of a plan that could lead to defeating Kronos. In the final book of the first series, he convinced Percy to bathe in the River Styx, making him invincible barring the small of his back. In the end of the final book Percy makes all the gods and goddess to 'claim' all their children and make sure they have cabin's in Camp Half-blood. Nico goes back to the camp and makes a cabin for himself and all the other minor gods and goddess.Later in teh Heroes of Olympus series,he became captured by to giants [in mark of Athena] though he survied. Through out house of Hades and at the end of blood of Olympus,it is said that Nico has a crush on Percy,though he gives up that dream and goes to Will Solace,the son of Apollo,and in trials of Apollo they are seen as a couple.

Thalia Grace is a daughter of Zeus. She is Jason's older sister and the cousin of Percy Jackson and Hazel Levesque and Bianca and Nico di Angelo. Grover Underwood was assigned to watch over her when she ran away from home at ten years old. On her journey, she met Luke Castellan and Annabeth Chase. They also had brief encounters with the Hunters of Artemis and she was enticed to join by Zoë Nightshade. When she was twelve, they were all soon attacked by a herd of monsters and caught by a Cyclops in New York. She was captured, but thanks to Annabeth, was freed. They meet the satyr Grover Underwood on the way. They escaped, but found that the monsters they had briefly escaped caught up to them. As they reached Half-Blood Hill, Thalia sent Luke, Grover, and Annabeth over the boundary line while she faced the monsters. She sacrificed her life for her friends, and her father, Zeus, took pity on her and transformed her to a pine tree. She is later brought back to life by the Golden Fleece and joins the quest in the third book where she ultimately joins the Hunters, taking the place of Zoë Nightshade. She has a younger brother, Jason Grace who was separated from her when she was 10. This became the reason she ran away from home.She wears a lot of dark makeup and punk style clothing. She has electric blue eyes and spiky black hair. She is so like Percy that according to Annabeth, they either could be best friends... or worst enemies.

Luke Castellan is one of Hermes's children and a major antagonist of the series. Though initially the counselor of Cabin 11 and an ally to Percy, he revealed his true nature as a high-ranking member of Kronos's army by attempting to kill Percy at the end of "The Lightning Thief", and on several occasions afterward. He is shown to harbor a great bitterness towards the gods (particularly his father, Hermes) for what he regards as abandonment. His mother had been driven crazy upon attempting to become the Oracle, leading to a stressful childhood. After reforming, Kronos does not need Luke's assistance. However, in his duel with Percy on Mount Olympus, striking Annabeth reminds him of his promise to protect her. This temporarily frees him from Kronos's influence. Percy makes his choice to give Luke Annabeth's knife, and Luke, cursed by the broken promise, kills himself by stabbing his own Achilles heel to destroy Kronos. This fulfills the prophecy, with Luke being the foretold hero. In the film, Luke is portrayed by Jake Abel.
Percy refers to Luke as a hero.



































Some of the known characters of Greek Mythology have made an appearance in this series:




Percy is one of the few demigods whose last name does not reflect his godly parent, though his first name does. Many of the campers at Camp Half-Blood have last names that consist of a traditional role or trait of their parent. Other last names are often commonplace: Rodriguez, Nakamura.


