Abraham Quintanilla, Jr.

Abraham Issac Quintanilla, Jr. (born February 20, 1939) is a Mexican American singer-songwriter and record producer. He was Selena's manager throughout her life.

Abraham and his close friends formed a Mexican American doo-wop band called, "Los Dinos" beginning in the 1950s. "Los Dinos" took to the road everywhere their music was much appreciated. Through struggles, Los Dinos sighed numerous minor Texas based record companies. By the 1960s Los Dinos switched their musical styles to Tejano music due to their low popularity. Abraham quite the band to tend to his family full-time soon after his third and final child, Selena was born in 1971. Abraham became managing his children's music abilities, soon after his daughter Selena had the ability to sing high notes in perfect pitch tune and memorization.

In the late 1970s, Abraham formed a new group including his three children under the "Selena y Los Dinos" title. Abraham created a Mexican American restaurant in 1982, including his musical gifted children, who performed altogether on the dance floor. Unfortunately, due to the low economy the restaurant was forced to close before it's first year. By 1984, Abraham became the children's manager full-time for live concerts, performance on television shows, and so forth with the help of the "Selena Tour Bus". In 1993, Abraham opened up his own recording studio, Q-Productions which he managed with various artists. In the same year, the "Selena Fan Club" was formed from Yolanda Saldivar who later took Selena's life. In 1995, Abraham was no longer the manager of Selena and her band Selena y Los Dinos due to an upcoming crossover album that would've impelled Selena into the main strain American pop. On March 31, 1995, Abraham's youngest child, Selena was murdered at the age of 23. Soon after her death, Abraham and his family decided to release The Selena Foundation a charitable organization which would help children alike in crisis, due to Selena's popularity to young children.

Abraham Quintanilla continues to produce new acts in the music business and film with his record company, Q-Productions. Since Selena's death, Abraham Quintanilla appeared in numerous television Selena specials.




