Kabaddi

Kabaddi (sometimes Kabbadi or Kabadi) is a team sport from South Asia. 

Two teams are on opposite halves of a small field. They take turns sending a "raider" into the other half. This is to win points by tackling members of the opposing team. Then the raider tries to return to his own half. He holds his breath and chants the word "Kabaddi" during the whole raid. The raider must not cross the lobby unless he touches any of his opponents. If he does not touch anyone then he will be "out". There is also a bonus line. If the raider touches it and returns to his side of the field, he will get extra points. 

In the international team version of kabaddi there are two teams of seven members. Each are on opposite halves of a field of 10 m × 13 m in case of men and 8 m × 12 m in case of women. Each has three extra players held in reserve. The game is played with 20-minute halves. There is a five-minute half-time break when the teams change sides.

Teams take turns sending a "raider" to the opposite team's half. The goal is to tag or wrestle ("confine") members of the opposite team. Tagged members are "out" and temporarily sent off the field.

The goal of the defenders is to stop the raider from returning to the home side before taking a breath. If any of the seven players cross the lobby without touching the raider he will be declared as "out".

The raider is sent off the field if:

Each time when a player is "out", the opposing team earns a point. A team scores a bonus of two points, called a "lona", if the entire opposing team is declared "out". At the end of the game, the team with the most points wins.

Matches are based on age and weight. Six officials supervise a match: one referee, two umpires, a scorer and two assistant scorers.

The Kabaddi World Cup was first played in 2004. It was played again in 2007, 2010 and 2016. So far India is the unbeaten champion in Kabaddi World Cup. Iran is the next most successful nation being twice runner-up. Pakistan was the runner-up in 2010.

The Women's Kabaddi World Cup was first played in 2012 in Patna, Bihar, India. India won the championship defeating Iran in the finals.


