Limoges

Limoges ( or "Limòtges") is a city and commune, the capital (prefecture) of the Haute-Vienne department and the historical capital of the old Limousin region in west-central France. It is also the capital of the "arrondissement" of the same name.

Limoges is known for its medieval and Renaissance enamels on copper, for its 19th-century porcelain and for its oak barrels which are used for Cognac and Bordeaux production.

The city of Limoges is near the western limits of the Massif Central, in the centre of the Haute-Vienne department. The Vienne river flows through the city.

Limoges is at about from Paris, from Toulouse, from Bordeaux and from Marseille.

The "commune" has an area of . Its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is .

The "commune" of Limoges is surrounded by the "communes":

The climate of Limoges, in the Köppen climate classification, is Cfb - Oceanic climate with template summers.

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Limoges is . The month with the most precipitation on average is October with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is February with an average of .

The average temperature for the year in Limoges is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The inhabitants of Limoges are known, in French, as " Limougeauds" (women: "Limougeaudes").

With a population of 134,577, Limoges has a population density of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Limoges

Limoges forms, together with other 8 "communes", the urban area of Limoges with a population of 183,860 inhabitants (2013) and an area of . This urban area is the centre of the metropolitan area of Limoges, formed by 96 "communes", with a population of 283,050 inhabitants (2013) and an area of .

Limoges is the prefecture of the Haute-Vienne department, the capital of the "arrondissement" of Limoges and the administrative centre () of 9 cantons


It is part of the intercommunality "Limoges Métropole" ().

Limoges is twinned with:





