Monsters University

Monsters University is a 2013 computer-animated comedy movie. It is a prequel to "Monsters, Inc." that has Sulley and Mike at university before they became friends. It was directed by Dan Scanlon and produced by Kori Rae. John Goodman, Billy Crystal, and Steve Buscemi reprised their voice-roles as Sulley, Mike, and Randall for the movie.


A second movie of "Monsters, Inc." had been planned since 2005. Following disagreements between then-Disney CEO Michael Eisner and then-Pixar owner Steve Jobs, Disney (who at the time owned the rights to make sequels to all of Pixar's films until the movie "Cars" was released) announced that a sequel to "Monsters, Inc." would be made by Circle 7 Animation. Circle 7 were also working on an early draft of "Toy Story 3" at the time.

The movie was originally going to be named "Monsters, Inc. 2: Lost in Scaradise". The movie would have been about Mike and Sulley visiting the human world to give Boo a birthday present. However, they find out that she had moved to a different house. After getting trapped in the human world, Mike and Sulley split up after disagreeing on what to do (Sulley wanting to look for Boo, Mike wanting to find a way to get back to Monstropolis).

Screenwriters Rob Muir and Bob Hilgenberg were hired to write the script. They storyboarded an early draft of the script.

A sequel made by Pixar was officially announced in 2010. The movie was originally planned to be released on November 16, 2012. However, it was later changed to November 2, 2012 (eleven years to the day after the release of its predecessor) to avoid direct competition with "The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn – Part 2". On April 5, 2011, it was announced that the film's release date had been pushed back farther to June 21, 2013 due to the success of Pixar movies that are released in the summer. This is according to Disney distribution executive Chuck Viane. It will be the studios' fourteenth feature film.

In early 2011, there were claims that "Monsters, Inc. 2" was going to be a prequel which focuses on Sulley and Mike's studies at the University of Fear, where they start off as rivals but soon become best friends. This is similar to how Woody and Buzz Lightyear start off in the first "Toy Story". On March 29, 2011, it was confirmed that the movie will indeed be a prequel and the new title "Monsters University" was shown. The movie will be directed by Dan Scanlon and produced by Kori Rae. It was also announced that John Goodman, Billy Crystal and Steve Buscemi will be reprising their roles. New voice cast includes Dave Foley, Julia Sweeney, Joel Murray, and Peter Sohn.

On August 12, 2011 Billy Crystal went to a 20th anniversary screening of "City Slickers". When he was asked about his return to the role of Mike Wazowski he said, "That's why I'm a little hoarse. I spent five-and-a-half hours today for our fourth session on "Monsters Inc. 2"." Crystal has said that he and co-star John Goodman are having a blast together and describes the script as "really great" and "hilarious". Crystal also gave little details of the story of the movie. He described, "It's college pranks with monsters. And I wear a retainer. Mike has a retainer."



