Antisocial personality disorder

Antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) is a personality disorder in which a person has problems with socially accepted behaviour. People with this disorder often disregard social norms, or the rights of other people. Other names for the condition are sociopathy, and dissocial personality disorder (DPD).

This pattern begins in childhood or adolescence, and continues into adulthood. People with ASPD have no conscience or sense of morality, although the large majority know right from wrong. They often commit crimes, have legal problems, and show behavior that is aggressive and in the large majority of cases, impulsive, reckless and destructive. About three percent of men and one percent of women have ASPD. ASPD is part of psychopathy. Because there are different definitions of sociopathy, that word is no longer used in a medical context.

According to the latest version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (the DSM-IV), a person has ASPD if they fit the following requirements:

A. Since age 15, the person has shown a pattern of not caring about and violating others' rights. This pattern must be pervasive, meaning that the person habitually acts this way in different settings. This pattern is shown by at least three of the following things:


B. To be diagnosed with ASPD, the person must be at least 18 years old.

C. By age 15, he or she seemed to qualify for conduct disorder.

D. The person's antisocial behavior is not caused by schizophrenia or a manic episode.

ASPD is not the same as psychopathy. They are similar; people with both conditions may show similar behaviors. However, they are diagnosed differently. Using the DSM criteria, a diagnosis of ASPD is based on a person's behaviors. There is not one official, agreed-upon definition or set of diagnostic criteria for psychopathy, but most tools that measure psychopathy focus on personality characteristics as well as behaviors.

Most people who score highly on the Hare Psychopathy Checklist (PCL-R), the most popular measure of psychopathy, also qualify for ASPD. However, most people with ASPD do not score as highly on the PCL-R. This suggests that most psychopaths qualify for ASPD, but most people with ASPD do not qualify as psychopaths. (So the diagnosis of ASPD covers most psychopaths, as well as many more people who are not psychopaths.)

The diagnosis of ASPD covers two to three times as many prisoners as the diagnosis of psychopathy does. (In other words, there are two to three times as many prisoners with ASPD as there are psychopathic prisoners.)

Depending on the behaviour, different subtypes have been identified:
Mixed types also occur. There is a debate on the subtypes.


