Warcraft: Lord of the Clans

Warcraft: Lord of the Clans is a novel written by writer Christie Golden. It is based on Blizzard Entertainment and was published in 2004. It is the second book in series of Warcraft.

The story was originally meant to be used for game but the project was canceled. The story itself wasn´t bad idea and role of main character was significant for games like Warcraft III or World of Warcraft. So the writer had to remake the story to form of book. She had only six weeks to do that.

Story is about son of orc Warchief. It started when he was a little baby. One day he and his parents were attacked by human soldiers in forest. Warchief and his wife were killed and one of humans took little orc baby with him to their base. The human was Aedelas Blackmoore and he named the baby Thrall which means slave to humans.
Blackmoore wasn´t sorry for him, he just wanted to use him as a source of power. His plan was to use Thrall as a Warchief and control through him orcs to serve Blackmoore.

Thrall and some other orcs were prisoned and learned to handle every weapon and how to use battle tactics effectively. They also tought Thrall basics of reading and writing. But he wanted to escape human base and find someone of his kind. One day his only human friend Taretha helped him. She set the base in fire and gave Thrall a chance to escape. Which he managed. After some time he found orc clan led by Grom Hellscream. When he learned some basic informations about orcs from Grom he headed to find his original clan, Frostwolf clan. There he met their shaman Drek´thar and Warchief Doomhammer. Drek´thar learned Thrall ancient ways of shamanism and Doomhammer told him about his parent´s death.

When Thrall managed art of shamanism, he raised together with Doomhammer an army against humans. Orcs won but Doomhammer died. In his last moments he granted Thrall the title of Warchief. Thrall decided to attack human base, home of Aedelas Blackmoore. He wanted to rescue imprisoned orcs there. They attacked and they succeeded in taking base. But only Blackmoore remained alive. Thrall went to his house, and when he entered he saw Blackmoore standing over dead body of Taretha. Angry Thrall killed blackmoore without any mercy. At the end he crushed base using his shamanistic powers and he informed other orc clans that they have new leader.


