Pasquale J. D'Amuro

Pasquale J. "Pat" D'Amuro is an American television analyst and former intelligence agent. He is an expert on terrorism. D'Amuro is a former Director of FBI in New York. He worked for the FBI for 26 years. After the FBI, he went to work for Giuliani Security & Safety, a New York security consulting company.

D'Amuro grew up in upstate New York. He earned his Bachelor's degree in Business at the Niagara University.

He bagan working for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) in May 1979. While working for the FBI, D'Amuro learn much about bank robberies, fraud, organized crime, drug trafficing and similar crimes.

After the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, he focused his research on terrorist attacks. After this, he was involved with the research of the 1998 United States embassy bombings in Tanzania and Kenya, the 2000 USS "Cole" bombing in Aden, Yemen, and the attacks on September 11, 2001, on the World Trade Center and The Pentagon. Over time, he became a leading expert on al-Qaeda.

After the attacks of September 11, D'Amuro became the assistant director of the counterterrorism division of the FBI. He made changes that led to better exchange of information between the FBI, CIA, the Department of Homeland Security and the Department of Defense. He is also responsible for the creation of the "Terrorism Watch List". It is a combination of the information of many different agencies.

In August 2003, he became director of the FBI office in New York. It is the largest FBI office. At this time, he held the third highest position in the FBI. At this time, he began giving public lectures often on the changes that had been made at the FBI since September 11. In March 2005, he left the FBI after a service of 26 years.

After leaving the FBI, he became director of Nine Thirty Capital Management and chairman of the board of Giuliani Security & Safety. In March 2006 he became a commissary of Mercy College. In April 2008, he became the director of American Defense Systems.

D'Amuro is often on the television network CNN as a senior analyst.

D'Amuro has been given several awards. These include the Presidential Rank Award of the FBI. In 2004, he was given an honorary doctorate in law from Mercy College in Dobbs Ferry, New York. In 2009, D'Amuro got a Four Freedoms Award in the category "Freedom from fear".



