Adela Noriega

Noriega was born in Mexico City, Mexico, on October 24, 1969. At the age of 12, she was discovered by a talent scout. She started working as a child model and appearing in commercials and music videos. Her father died when Noriega was in her early adolescence. Her mother died in 1995 from cancer. She has two siblings; an older sister, Reyna, and a younger brother, Alejandro. Noriega takes long breaks between projects and avoids publicity. She lives in the United States.

Noriega made her television debut at the age of 14 in the telenovela, "Principessa". Soon after, she appeared in another telenovela, "Juana Iris", and on a comic show, "Cachún cachún ra ra!". In 1986, she got her first leading role in the telenovela "Yesenia" where she played a role of a young gypsy. Shortly after, she starred as a leading character of "Quinceañera". "Quinceañera" is considered to be the first telenovela made for teenagers because it dealt with the problems of youth (drugs, date rape and gangs) for the first time in the television genre. A year later, she appeared in another teen drama, "Dulce Desafío".

In 1993, Noriega signed a contract with the U.S. network, Telemundo, and starred in a successful telenovela, "Guadalupe". In 1995, she moved to Colombia and played the leading role in "Maria Bonita", co-produced by RTI Colombia and Telemundo network. Noriega returned to Mexico in 1997 and starred as the lead of "María Isabel", where she portrayed an indigenous woman. A year after, she played the leading female character in "El Privilegio de Amar", the highest rated television program in Mexico to date.

In 2001, Noriega played the leading role in "El Manantial". In 2003, she portrayed an aristocrat, Matilde Peñalver y Beristáin, in "Amor Real". This historical telenovela received critical acclaim and was highly successful. In 2005, she played the leading role in "La esposa virgen". Her most recent starring role was in the telenovela, "Fuego en la sangre", from 2008.

The following table shows some of the nominations and wins for Adela Noriega.



