Giraffe

A giraffe ("Giraffa camelopardalis") is a mammal which lives in Africa. Giraffes have an even number of toes and are the tallest land animals. Giraffes and Okapi are the family "Giraffidae".

(Fully grown giraffes stand tall, with males taller than females.). The tallest recorded male was and the tallest recorded female was tall. The average weight is for an adult male and for an adult female. Maximum weights of and having been recorded for males and females, respectively. Giraffes have a very long neck and legs. Their fur has a light yellowish or brownish colour with dark patches. Both male and female giraffes have small horn-like stumps on their head, which are covered with skin. They have a long black tongue, which can be up to 45 cm long. Giraffes are the tallest land animals on Earth, with necks that can be up to 2-2.4 m (6.6-7.9 ft) in length.

(Giraffes are found in parts of Africa. They live on the savannah, which is the African grassland, or in light woodland. )They do not live in thick forests where it is difficult to see predators, such as lions, approaching.i

Giraffes eat mostly leaves from tall trees, which they can reach because of their long legs and long necks, as well as Fruit. Their rough tongue allows them to eat the acacia leaves protected by thorns. They can go without water for weeks. 

Giraffes live alone or in loose groups. Young male giraffes form small groups until they become mature. Adult males live alone. Females form groups of 4–32 animals. When the female is close to giving birth, it leaves the group for a time to give birth to its offspring, and comes back 2-3 weeks after her baby is born. 

After a pregnancy of 14-15 months, the female gives birth to usually a single baby (which is called "calf"). Giraffes give birth while standing, so the baby falls down 2 metres. Giraffe calfs are already 2 m tall and weigh 50-55 kg. The calf stays with its mother for 1½ years. Young giraffes become mature when they are 4 years old, and they are fully grown when they are 6 years old. Giraffes can become 25 years old, in captivity they can become 35 years old.They also drink coca cola,ice tea,and play fidget spinners.

MORE FACTS

Like all mammals, giraffes have only seven bones in their necks.

There are about nine different subspecies of giraffe. There are only small differences between them. When giraffes of two different sub-species breed, the young are called hybrids (mixed breeds). Of the nine sub-species of giraffe, only one, the Rothchild's, is endangered. 

Giraffes have horns called ossicones. These come from the cartilage displaced from their skull as it develops. These are fur-covered bumps on their skulls, unlike the horns of other animals. Giraffe skin is blotched in patterns of browns and yellows. No two giraffes have the same pattern. The different sub-species have different coat patterns.


