2013 Connecticut train crash

A Metro-North Railroad train from New York City heading to New Haven, Connecticut collided with another train on May 17, 2013. This event happened at 6:10 PM (EST). An east-bound Metro-North train went off its tracks and collided with a west-bound train near Fairfield, Connecticut.

On May 17, 2013, officials shut down the train which usually carries between 125,000 people daily. It is one of the most busiest trains in the area. Metro-North was also shut down. All Amtrak trains that uses the New York City-New Haven path are shut down. This is to avoid further collisions. Because of a bridge replacement, the two trains were the only way going and coming from New York City.

Investigators believe the trains collided because the tracks were damaged. Some say the damaged was done when the trains collided. Others believe it was damaged before the two trains collided with each other. The wreckage of the trains were found to be as far as 200 yards away from the area the accident happened. Many cars that were near the event were heavily damaged. Connecticut governor, Dannel Malloy, believes this investigation will last several days. The FBI were part of the investigations. On May 18, they were no longer a part of the investigation crew.

One person is in critical condition at Bridgeport Hospital in Bridgeport, Connecticut as of May 19, 2013. There were five who were critically injured. One of them was "very critically injured". Six patients who were injured remain in St. Vincent's Medical Center, also in Bridgeport. Nine people are currently in the hospital, with 70 injured. Some reports state 60 people were injured. Many people saw broken limbs after this happened. 

Many people on the train had to break one of the trains windows to get out. There are no reported deaths. Many bodies flew out of the two trains.

The Metro-North train left from Grand Central Station in New York City at 4:41 p.m (EST) on May 17, 2013. There were 300 passengers on the train. It went off its track near I-95 in Bridgeport, Connecticut. The other train left New Haven, Connecticut at 5:30 pm. This train had 400 passengers. The two collided with each other at 6:10 pm near Fairfield, Connecticut.

Connecticut governor, Dan Malloy said in a press conference on May 18 that the investigation will be on-going for a couple days. A National Transportation Safety Board member Earl Weener said that they will not release further details on what happened. Bridgeport Mayor, Bill Finch believes the cost could hurt the region's economy by millions of US dollars. 

US senator Chris Murphy said that he is very pleased that no one has died from the collision. Richard Blumenthal, US senator, also said to the "New York Daily News" that he is happy to know no one has died.


