College Scholastic Ability Test

College Scholastic Ability Test, known as Su-Neung, is a national standardized university entrance test in South Korea. The test is held on second Thursday of November of every year. The Korea Institute for Curriculum and Evaluation (KICE) conducts and supervises the test. A person who wants to go to university must take the test. Its result is accepted by most of universities in Korea. It is a typical criterion to judge whether the person is allowed to go to a university.

The test has five sections - Korean language, Math, English language, Social Studies/Sciences/Vocational Education and Foreign language/Chinese Character. The applicants can choose the number of the domain which they would take, after considering of applicant's ability, aptitude, demand of the university which they apply to.

The Korean and English section are common to all applicants. However, if the applicant decides to take Math, Society/Science/Vocation test and Foreign language/Chinese Character, he or she must choose the subtype of the test. 

For Math section, there are two subtypes to choose - "A" or "B". The type "A" consists of two parts - Math 1, Basic Calculus and Statistics. Type "B" consists of four parts - Math 1, Math 2, Geometry and Vector, Integral calculus and Statistics.

For Social Studies/Sciences/Vocational Education section, applicants have to choose one category from the three and each has several subtypes. 

Finally, the applicants who take the Foreign language/Chinese Character test have to decide one subject out of nine (German I, French I, Spanish I, Chinese I, Japanese I, Russian I, Arabic I, Basic Vietnamese, Chinese Characters and Classics).

The first test, Korean, starts at 8:40 A.M. The last test, Foreign language/Chinese Character test, ends at 5:00 P.M.. For disabled people, there is some extra time. Blind people are given 1.5 time prolonged time than normal applicants in every section, weak-eyed applicants and applicants who suffer from cerebral palsy are given 20 extra minutes in every sections.


