Gough Whitlam

Edward Gough Whitlam (11 July 1916 – 21 October 2014), known "Gough Whitlam", was an Australian politician. He was the 21st Prime Minister of Australia., and the only Prime Minister to have been dismissed from office by a Governor-General. He was Prime Minister for three years. His Labor Party was elected after 23 years of government by the Liberal-Country Party Coalition, and his government made a lot of new changes. Whitlam is the only Prime Minister who has lived in the lifetime of all the other Prime Ministers. 

Whitlam was born in Kew, a suburb of Melbourne, Victoria. He studied at the University of Sydney. Whitlam served at the Royal Australian Air Force from 1941 through 1945 during World War II. 

Whitlam became Prime Minister in December 1972. He succeeded William McMahon. His government, for most of the time it lasted, did not have a majority in the Senate (the upper house of the Australian Parliament). This made it hard for Whitlam's government to make laws. In 1975 the government thought about borrowing US$4 billion in foreign loans. One cabinet minister, Rex Connor, had secret discussions with a loan broker from Pakistan. The Treasurer, Jim Cairns, misled parliament over this. Partly as a result, the new leader of the Opposition, Malcolm Fraser, use the Senate to stop passing money for the government until there was an election. 

In 1975 the opposition, led by Fraser, blocked government supply in the Senate. This meant that the government had no money with which to pay civil servants and carry out administration. In order to end the crisis the Governor-General, Sir John Kerr, dismissed Whitlam and made Fraser the temporary Prime Minister. Whitlam was easily defeated by Fraser in the election that was held a month later. 

He was defeated for a second time by Fraser at the next election in 1977, and resigned from parliament shortly after that. Since then he has continued to be a very public figure, writing books and often commenting on political affairs.

Whitlam married Margaret Dovey a prominent Australian swimmer and social worker in 1942 and they remained married till her death on 17 March 2012. On 21 October 2014, Whitlam died in Elizabeth Bay, Sydney, New South Wales at the age of 98.

Whitlam is one of the most controversial people in Australia. Many people think of him as a hero while others consider his government to have been inefficient.



