Larry the Cable Guy

Daniel Lawrence "Larry" Whitney (born February 17, 1963) is an American stand-up comedian, actor, musician, voice artist, and comedian. He is best known by his stage name and character Larry the Cable Guy. 

He is one of the members of the Blue Collar Comedy Tour. This is a group of comedians. The other members of the Tour are Bill Engvall, Ron White, and Jeff Foxworthy. 

Whitney has made seven comedy albums. Three of these have been listed as gold albums by the RIAA. He has been in three Blue Collar Comedy Tour movies. Whitney has also been in the movies "", "Delta Farce", and "Witless Protection". He is well known as the voice of Mater in the "Cars" movies. Whitney's catchphrase "Git-R-Done!" is also the name of his book.

On January 26, 2010, the television channel History said that it wanted to make a series with Whitney. It is called "Only in America with Larry the Cable Guy". In this series, Whitney would explore the United States. He would learn about different ways people lived. He would also learn about their jobs and hobbies. The first episode of the series aired on February 8, 2011.

A CMT bio says that Whitney grew up on a pig farm in Pawnee City, Nebraska. He went to college at the Baptist University of America. He says his roommates from Texas and Georgia helped him create his imitation Southern accent. He left college after his third year to be a comedian.

Whitney started his career in radio. He was a disc jockey in Blue Springs, Missouri. He became known in the early 1990s when he made regular radio appearances by telephone on many radio programs. These included programs in Omaha, Nebraska, Baltimore, Maryland, Kansas City, Missouri, Orlando, Florida, Portsmouth, New Hampshire and Manchester, New Hampshire

He became famous for creating the "Larry" character. It is a personality that he now uses for his entire stage act. The Larry character has a stereotypical redneck appearance and a thick Southern accent. He tells stories about his fictional "family". He is well known for his catchphrase "Git-R-Done!" A large part of Whitney's act is his accent. He says in interviews and in his autobiographical book "GIT-R-DONE" that he uses the accent both on and off stage. He does this because he may forget it if he kept his normal accent. He uses catchphrase humor, including "Git-R-Done," "Lord, I apologize, and me with the starvin' Pygmies down there in New Guinea. Amen." and "I don't care who ya are, that's funny right there" after certain jokes. 

His first two comedy albums, "Lord, I Apologize" (2001), and "The Right To Bare Arms" (2005), have both been certified gold by the RIAA. A third album, "Morning Constitutions" was released in 2007.

In 2006, Comedy Central asked Whitney to be the voice of character for an animated series they wanted to create. The series would use his character as one of two owners of a small cable channel. A half-hour pilot was made but not broadcast.

Whitney was roasted in a Comedy Central special on March 15, 2009. During the roast he can be heard talking to people using his normal voice.

On Tuesday, February 8, 2011 his series, "Only in America with Larry the Cable Guy", began being broadcast on the History Channel. 4.1 million viewers watched it.

Whitney lives in Lincoln, Nebraska. He married his wife Cara in 2005. They have two children together. They have a son, Wyatt (born August 2006), and a daughter, Reagan (born October 2007). In 2010, Whitney and his wife said that their son Wyatt has hip dysplasia. 

In the town where he grew up, Pawnee City, Nebraska, there is a street named after him. Whitney also gave money to buy new theatrical equipment for the high school.




