Anthony Horowitz

Anthony Craig Horowitz (born 5 April 1956) is an English novel writer and screenwriter. He has written many children's novels, including "The Power of Five", "Alex Rider" and "The Diamond Brothers" series. He has written over fifty books. He has also written many things for television. He has adapted many of Agatha Christie's Hercule Poirot novels for the ITV series. He is the creator and writer of the ITV series "Foyle's War", "Midsomer Murders" and "Collision".

Anthony Horowitz was born in 1956 in Middlesex. His family were Jewish and rich. When he was young, he lived an upper-class lifestyle.<nowiki></nowiki> Horowitz was overweight and unhappy. He enjoyed reading books from his father's library. At the age of eight, Horowitz was sent to a boarding school. The school was called Orley Farm. It was in Harrow, Middlesex. There, he entertained others by telling them the stories he had read. Horowitz said that his time in the school was "a brutal experience". He said that he was often beaten by the headmaster John Ellis.

Horowitz's father was a "fixer" for prime minister Harold Wilson. Because he was nearly bankrupt, he moved his money into Swiss bank accounts. He died from cancer when his son, Anthony, was 22. The family was never able to find the missing money, even though they had tried for years. Horowitz loved his mother. She showed him "Frankenstein" and "Dracula". She also gave him a human skull for his 13th birthday. Horowitz said in an interview once that it reminds him to get to the end of each story because he will soon look like the skull. From the age of eight, Horowitz knew he wanted to be a writer, realising "the only time when I'm totally happy is when I'm writing". He graduated from the University of York with a BA in English literature in 1977.

In at least one interview, Horowitz said that believes H. P. Lovecraft based his fictional "Necronomicon" on real writing, and to have read some of that writing.

Horowitz lives in North London with his wife Jill Green. He married her in Hong Kong on 15 April 1988. Green produces "Foyle's War". Horowitz writes this series for ITV. They have two sons. They are Nicholas Mark Horowitz (born 1989) and Cassian James Horowitz (born 1991). The family have a dog named Lucky, that has been run over 3 times. Horowitz says that his family has a lot to do with his success in writing. This is because he says they help him with ideas and research. Horowitz is a patron of child protection charity Kidscape.


Russian Roulette (2013)












