Touch My Body

"Touch My Body" is a song co-written by American singer Mariah Carey, Christopher "Tricky" Stewart, Crystal "Cri$tyle" Johnson and Terius "The-Dream" Nash for Carey's 11th studio album, "E=MC²". It is the first single off "E=MC²". The single was produced by Carey and Stewart.

Mariah talking about why she chose "Touch My Body" as the first single of the album:

-Mariah Carey

The song was chosen as the lead single of the album during a vote with producer L.A. Reid and staff in Island Records. Carey stated that the group "decided to just go with the mid-tempo and everybody kinda liked the song 'cause it's just fun and cute and sexy and sweet".

The song was transmitted digitally to radio stations on February 12 at 6:30pm ET for immediate airplay via All Access. The single went for adds on radio station playlists on February 19."Touch My Body" premiered on Chicago's hit rhythmic radio station, B96, ahead of schedule at 4:00pm.

Reviews of the song by critics were mostly good. "Blender" said that it was a "pop genius making genius pop". Bill Lamb from About.com gave "Touch My Body" 4 out of 5 stars. Newsday named it as the "Song of the Week", saying that it was her best first single on an album since "Heartbreaker".

Rolling Stone gave it 3.5 stars in its March 6, 2008 issue.

Brett Ratner is the director of the video. Ratner also directed Carey's videos for "I Still Believe", "Heartbreaker", "Thank God I Found You", "It's like That", and "We Belong Together". In an interview with AllHipHop.com, Ratner said, "Mariah is musically at the top of her game and has never looked better... This will be our 6th music video we have collaborated on and definitely the best one yet visually, as well as musically. The video for "Touch My Body" is the perfect combination of fantasy and comedy with Mariah looking more beautiful than she has ever looked, ever.". The video also stars Jack McBrayer from "30 Rock", a show that Carey is a fan of.

Carey appeared on MTV's "TRL" and BET's "106 & Park" on Wednesday, February 27, 2008, to premiere the video for "Touch My Body"; BET also played the video all day, every hour on the hour, until "106 & Park". VH1 posted a 45-second sneak peek on their blog on February 26, and subsequently posted the video in its entirety at midnight on February 27, 2008; the video was also posted on the Island Records website.

On March 5 the "Touch My Body" music video debuted at #1 on MTV's TRL countdown.

Following the song's February 12 digital transmission, after only a day's worth of airplay, "Touch My Body" entered the "Billboard" Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs Chart at #78 the chart week of February 23, 2008. It is currently at #15 in its fourth chart week. It also debuted on airplay alone at #57 on the Billboard Hot 100 as the "Hot Shot" debut of the week, and is currently #24. It also debuted on the Canadian Hot 100 at #97 and has since risen to #59.


