Taglish and Englog

Taglish and Englog are the names of the mixed language family that developed in Manila from the of English and Tagalog languages, the common languages of the Philippines. There are several versions of it, including Coño English, Jejenese and Swardspeak. There are attempts to differentiate the usage of Taglish and Englog where Taglish refers to the usage of English words in Tagalog syntax while Englog refers to the usage of Tagalog words in English syntax. 

Taglish and Englog are used by Filipinos in countries like Australia, Canada, the Republic of Ireland, New Zealand, the United States, and the United Kingdom. It used in text messages to write more quickly.

Taglish (or Englog) is a language of Manila created by mixing the English and the Tagalog languages together. The language is used because Tagalog words are longer than words in English. Example:
English action words, and even some naming words, can be Tagalog action words. This is done by the addition of one or more prefixes or infixes and by the doubling of the first sound of the starting form of the action or naming word. 

The English action word "drive" can be changed to the Tagalog word "magda-drive" meaning "will drive" (used in place of the Tagalog word "magmamaneho"). The English naming word "Internet" can also be changed to the Tagalog word "nag-Internet" meaning "have used the Internet".

Taglish and Englog also use sentences of mixed English or Tagalog words and phrases. The conjunctions used to connect them can come from eany of the two. Some examples include:

Because its informal nature, experts of English and Tagalog discourage its use.

Jejenese is the kind of speech used by people called "Jejemons". This is a subculture in the Philippines, made up of people who try to change the English language to better suit Spanish and Filipino. Their alphabet, Jejebet, is based on Leet. Words are created by mixing letters in a word, mixed large and small letters, using the letters H, X or Z many times, and mixing of numbers in words. The spelling is the same as in Leet.

Swardspeak is a kind of Taglish and Englog used by gay people. It is a form of slang. Swardspeak uses word from Tagalog, English, Spanish, Cebuano, Japanese, Sanskrit, and other languages. Names of Celebrities and trademark brands are also used.

Coño English (tl: "Konyo") or Colegiala English (es: ) is a creole of Taglish and Englog that originated from the children in rich families of Manila. The word "coño" itself came from the Spanish word "coño". It is a form of Philippine English that has Spanish and Tagalog words. Unlike other forms of Taglish and Englog, Coño English sounds more gentle and feminine.

The most common aspect of Coño English is the building of action words using the English action word "make" with the base form of a Tagalog action word. Examples:

Sometimes, Tagalog interjections such as "ano", "naman", "pa", "na" (or "nah"), "no" (or "noh"), "a" (or "ha"), "e" (or "eh"), and "o" (or "oh") are placed to add emphasis. 

"No" and "a" (from the Tagalog word "ano") are used for questions and are added to the end of a sentence only. "Ano" (meaning "what") is also used for questions and is placed in the front or the end.

"E" (added to answers to questions) and "o" (for statements) are used for exclamations and are added to the front only. "Pa" (meaning "not yet", "not yet done", "to continue", or "still") and "na" (meaning "now", "already", or "already done") can be placed in the middle or end. "Naman" (same as "na" but mostly for emphasis only) is placed anywhere.

The interjection "no?" (equal to the Spanish "¿no?" and the German "nicht?") is pronounced as or (with a pure vowel instead of the English glide), which shows influence from Spanish.

English description words are often replaced with Tagalog action words. The language also has many Spanish words or Spanish words like "baño" ("bathroom"), 
"tostado" ("toasted") and "jamón" ("ham").

Due to the feminine sound of Coño English, male speakers sometimes overuse the Tagalog word "pare" (which means "pal" or "buddy"), in order to make it sound more masculine. Sometimes "tsong" (whose meaning is the same) is used instead of "pare" or with it.Examples below:


