Alaska

Alaska () is a state in the United States. It is in the Northwest corner of the continent of North America. Alaska does not touch any other US state. It has borders with Canada, the Arctic Ocean, the Pacific Ocean, and the Bering Strait.

Alaska is the biggest state in the United States. It is the 4th least populated state (there are 3 other states with fewer people living there.) It has the lowest population density of all the states. About half of the population of Alaska lives in the Anchorage metropolitan area. 722,718 people live in Alaska.

The United States bought Alaska from Russia on March 30, 1867. This was called the Alaska Purchase. It cost $7.2 million. Today, that would be $120 million. The price was about $0.02 per acre ($4.74/km). Alaska became an organized (or incorporated) territory on May 11, 1912. It became the 49th state on January 3, 1959.

The name "Alaska" comes from the Aleut word "alaxsaq". This means "the mainland" or "the object towards which the action of the sea is directed." The land is also called Alyeska, which is another Aleut word that means "the great land." The Russian name was Аляска.

The capital city is Juneau, but the biggest city is Anchorage. Alaska is the biggest state in the United States, but it almost has the least people. Alaska has almost 20% of all the land in the U.S., but only about 0.2% of the people. It is not connected to any other states by American land, but it is connected to Canada.

Alaska has many glaciers, some of which are can be seen from passing cruise ships. Some are coastal, and others are not by the ocean. It is a popular tourist destination, as there is a very rich culture along with beautiful scenery. There are many wild animals in Alaska. Some of them are the brown bear, the moose, and the wolf.

There are some important industries in Alaska, like oil, fishing, mining, and forestry. Oil is the biggest industry in Alaska. Most of the oil is very far north in the Alaskan arctic. A very long pipeline starts at the northern coast of Alaska and runs to the southern coast. It is over long. There were many gold rushes in Alaska.





