Jessie J

Jessica Ellen Cornish (born 27 March 1988), better known by her stage name Jessie J, is an English singer and songwriter. She was born and raised in London where she studied at the BRIT School before signing with Gut Records.

Jessie J became better known after the release of her debut single "Do It Like a Dude" which peaked at number two in the UK. She achieved her first number one in the UK, France, Ireland and New Zealand with the song "Price Tag". After those two singles, she released her debut album "Who You Are" in 2011. The album charted at number two in the UK. Other singles from the album included "Nobody's Perfect", "Who's Laughing Now" and "Who You Are" which charted within the top 20 in the UK but the release of fifth single "Domino" became international chart success, peaking at number 6 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and becoming her second UK number one. She is the first British female artist to have six top ten singles on one album.

Jessie J has written songs for other singers such as Chris Brown and Miley Cyrus.

Jessie J is recognized for an unconventional musical and performing style. It mixes her soul voice with contemporary R&B, pop music and hip-hop influences. She has several awards and nominations. These include the 2011 Critics' Choice BRIT Award and the BBC's Sound of 2011. As of April 2012, Jessie has sold over 11 million singles and 2.5 million albums worldwide.

On 4 October 2011, Jessie said that she will be one of four coaches for new BBC program, "The Voice UK". The other coaches are will.i.am (of The Black Eyed Peas), Tom Jones and Danny O'Donoghue (of The Script).

Asked about her bisexuality in an interview on the "In Demand" radio show on 3 March 2011, Jessie J stated, "I've never denied it. Whoopie doo guys, yes, I've dated girls and I've dated boys – get over it." According to "The Guardian", Jessie J's sexuality is valuable to young teens, especially for young girls unsure of themselves because of their sexuality and identity, to feel "that this does happen and this is normal." In April 2014, Jessie J renounced her bisexuality in an interview with "Daily Mirror"'s "3am" celebrity tabloid; "For me, it was a phase. But I'm not saying bisexuality is a phase for everybody", she said.

On 12 June 2011, at the Capital Radio Summertime Ball, Jessie ruptured several tendons in her foot during rehearsals. She performed for several weeks while sitting on a gilded throne.




