Lobatus gigas

Lobatus gigas , commonly known as the queen conch, is a species of large edible sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusc in the family of true conches, the Strombidae. This species is one of the largest molluscs native to the tropical northwestern Atlantic, from Bermuda to Brazil, reaching up to 35.2 centimetres (13.9 in) in shell length.

The shell is characterized by its large size, solidity and sculptured design with large thorns. The mouth is large, calloused, has great lip colors white, pink, yellow and orange. Sifonales Channels, anal and notch estromboide are wide and well marked.

"Lobatus gigas" is native to the tropical Western Atlantic coasts of North and Central America. It lives in the greater Caribbean tropical zone.
Aruba, of the Netherlands Antilles; Barbados; all of the islands and cays of the Bahamas; Belize; Bermuda; North and northeastern regions of Brazil (though this is contested by some authors); Old Providence Island in Colombia; Costa Rica; the Dominican Republic; Panama; Swan Islands in Honduras; Jamaica; Martinique; Alacran Reef, Campeche, Cayos Arcas and Quintana Roo, in Mexico; Puerto Rico; Saint Barthélemy; Mustique and Grenada in the Grenadines; Pinar del Río, North Havana Province, North Matanzas, Villa Clara, Cienfuegos, Holguín, Santiago de Cuba and Guantánamo, in the Turks and Caicos Islands and Cuba; South Carolina, Florida, including East Florida, West Florida, the Florida Keys and the Flower Garden Banks National Marine Sanctuary, in the United States; Carabobo, Falcon, Gulf of Venezuela, Las Aves archipelago, Los Roques archipelago, Los Testigos Islands and Sucre in Venezuela; St. Croix in the Virgin Islands.

He located between 0 and 18 m depth, but most often in soils carbonatites and seagrass beds. 

Common names include "queen conch" and "pink conch" in English, "caracol rosa" and "caracol rosado" in Mexico, "caracol de pala", "cobo", "botuto" and "guarura" in Venezuela, "caracol reina", "lambí" in the Dominican Republic, and "carrucho" in Puerto Rico.



