Graphics tablet

A graphics tablet is a computer input device which replaces hand-drawing. Users can draw directly to computer as if they were drawing on a paper or any other material. These tablets are also used to subscribe some documents or in East Asia to capture local handwriting. 

Another thing that tablets can do is digitizing. It´s process which trace an image from piece of paper.

Surface: A tablet has a flat surface on which the user can draw. This surface can be different sizes or shapes. Images drawn on the tablet are not shown on surface itself but they appear on the monitor. However there are screen hybrids which allow user to see drawing right on the drawing surface. These hybrids are combination of an ordinary tablet and touchscreen (unlike touchscreen, they offer pressure sensitivity and higher resolution).
Stylus: A stylus is a pen-like device (often powered by battery) that allows sending user action to the tablet. It detects different degrees of pressure, e.g. for use in a drawing program to differentiate line thickness or color density. 

Puck: After stylus, pucks are the most commonly used tablet accessory. A puck is a mouse-like device that can detect its absolute position and rotation. Professional pucks often have a loupe for greater precision.

Passive tablets use electromagnetic induction technology. The tablet generates an electromagnetic signal, which is received by the circuit in the stylus. The wires in the tablet then change to a receiving mode and read the signal generated by the stylus.

Active tablets use self-powered electronics that generate and send a signal to the tablet. Tablets may listen for pen signals constantly, so it eliminates inaccuracy of transmission.

Optical tablets operate by a very small digital camera in the stylus.

Acoustic tablets were early models. A small sound generator was mounted in the stylus, and the acoustic signal picked up by two microphones placed near the writing surface.

Electromagnetic tablets work by generating and detecting an electromagnetic signal.

Since a stylus can sense pressure, tilting and other attributes, it is good for computer graphic usage (especially two dimensional). These attributes can make differences between brush size, opacity, shape, color, etc. in certain graphic programs. Graphics tablets are much used for technical drawing and computer-aided design.

They are also used for online teaching, e.g. live tutorials or lessons where visual information is needed. Some users prefer tablet computers for some purposes, though those devices mostly lack sensors for pressure and tilt.



