The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time

The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time is a video game made in 1998 for the Nintendo 64. It was the fifth Legend of Zelda video game and was the first to be in 3D. Many people think that it is one of the best games ever. In the game, the player character Link goes on an adventure to save the kingdom of Hyrule from the evil Ganondorf. To save Hyrule, Link must fight against Ganondorf and all his minions. A special object in the game is the sacred Ocarina that Link can play after he learns the songs, causing different effects depending on the song he plays, such as moving him to certain places around Hyrule (making it much easier and faster to travel), and starting rain (for example to water plants or fill dry lakes).

In the Kokiri Forest, the Great Deku Tree asks the fairy Navi to tell Link to come to him. When Link arrives, he learns that the Great Deku Tree is dying because of a curse placed on him by an evil man called Ganondorf. Link is the only one who can save him. Link must enter the Great Deku Tree in order to save him from the curse.

Although Link defeats the most of the monsters inside, he is too late to save the tree. Before the Great Deku Tree dies, he gives Link the Kokiri Emerald, a magic stone, and tells him that it was a man in black armor who put the curse on him. He also tells Link that he needs to go to princess of Hyrule at Hyrule Castle. Before he leaves, Saria, Link's friend, gives him the Fairy Ocarina, a magic instrument.

At Hyrule Castle, Link sneaks pass the guards and meets Princess Zelda. Zelda shows Link, through a window, a strange man with evil eyes. She tells Link that the man is Ganondorf. She also tells him that Ganondorf wants to steal the Triforce, a magic symbol of the Gods, and take control of the world. To defeat him, Link needs to find three magical "Spiritual Stones" (Kokiri Emerald being one of them), six great medallions and the magical Ocarina of Time.

Ocarina of Time was a very popular game, and many people liked it. Five million copies of the game were sold around the world after six months, and 7.6 million copies were sold in total.

Many people were happy with this game, although there were a few, small problems. One problem was that players cannot skip through the parts where people talk. Another was that players cannot play against the boss monsters that they have already killed. 

Overall, many websites and magazines think that Ocarina of Time is one of the best games ever made. GameSpot, "Famitsu", IGN, "Electric Gaming Monthly", and "Edge" all gave the game perfect scores.

The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D is a remake made for the Nintendo 3DS console. It was released in June 2011. It includes use of the console's touch screen and better graphics.



