Modern Combat 3: Fallen Nation

Modern Combat 3: Fallen Nation (abbreviated "MC3") is a shooter game by the developer and publisher Gameloft. It was released end October 2011 for iOS devices and mid December for Android devices. It is a sequel to 2009's "Modern Combat: Sandstorm" and 2010's "Modern Combat 2: Black Pegasus". 

In the backstory to the game, terrorists from North Korea, Pakistan and Russia have formed an alliance with the name "K.P.R.". Led by General Popovich and General Tong, the K.P.R. alliance declared war to the United States. After they hacked the U.S. defense network down, K.P.R. went on US territory and deployed several big weapons in American cities. 

The game begins in Los Angeles, as Corporal James Walker and his team are going into the NSA building. They need to secure important information in the building. After some successful missions, Walker is contacted by Sergeant Downs. Then, Walker is in the "Phantom Unit". They are then sent on a mission to Alaska to locate and secure a missing group of American soldiers.

Later, Phantom Unit goes to Pakistan. They have to capture Edward Page, a former US Ranger who has joined the K.P.R. Alliance. After his capture, Page says that General Tong is planning to bomb America from North Korea. The squad can kill Tong, but after a while Popovich captures Downs and Walker. A nuclear missile is then launched to destroy Seattle. As prisoners of K.P.R., they can escape after a while, destroy the nuclear weapons. After that, the US miliary can end the KPR threat by retaking American ground.

As with both "Sandstorm" and "Black Pegasus", "Fallen Nation" has received relatively positive reviews. 

Slide to Play rated the game a 4/4, saying ""Modern Combat 3" is a gorgeous, adrenaline rush of a game that capably answers the (mobile) call of duty. 

IGN gave the game an 8.5/10 and called it "a huge, intense, and polished shooter. "Modern Combat 3" is the best FPS on mobile devices"

TouchArcade also gave a positive review, concluding that "if you want to play first person shooters on your iOS device, "Modern Combat 3: Fallen Nation" is a must-buy game."


