Sylvanian Families

Sylvanians were origanally set in Japan in the 1950's most of the families are rural middle-class with many luxuries and local buisnesses. They have many leisure activities such as horse riding, rowing and hosting garden parties. The simple caravan means that they can enjoy short stays on holiday. This means that they can be away from their house whether it is a small cottage or a multi-storey town house.
In 1985 sylvanian families were launched in both Japan and North America. They were such a success that in 1987 they moved over the Atlantic to Western Europe and to the UK. By 1988 these small toys were a major success world wide, they went on to win London toy of the year award 3 times in a row this had never been achieved before or after. They were so popular that in the late 80's an animated TV series was made, this was greatly watched and spain and the UK. In the 90's it was aired on American TV.
By the mid 90's sylvanian families, despite their major success, had gone out of business in the UK. The production company Tomy lost the rights to sylvanian families and American Calico Critters. In the late 90's another company, Flair, took over sylvanian families and reintroduced them into the UK. It was in 2007 that they celebrated their 20th birthday a special edition dalmation family(that had not been sold since they went out of production) with red party hats saying 'happy birthday'. 2012 was the 25th birthday and they sold a celebration rabbit family in honour a birthday that they never have seen if it hadn't have been for Flair.

68 Mount Grove Road is the address where the sylvanian families shop stands. The shop is quite small but stuffed from floor to ceiling with figures, displays and new box sets. People from all around the world to go to the sylvanian shop to become one of the many people who have been inside the famous shop.

In Japan there is a giant life size sylvanian families village, including a bakery with real bread based on the bread in watermill bakery. You can meet life size sylvanian characters and go in life size houses made from the models themselves. 

Sylvanian characters can be spoiled. Or they cannot. There is a range of house to choose from. from the starter 2 roomed cottage to the 9 roomed grand hotel. There are many different furniture items that can be put inside. there is the cheap furniture, things like a table, a bed or a toilet. Then there is the more expensive range like the luxury brass bed, velvet covered table and chairs and an entire bathroom including shower and sink aswell as toilet. There are many luxuries that you can give them that they don not need like the baby nursery room and roof garden.


