Comparison of regions of Japan

The Comparison of regions of Japan highlights differences and similarities. The regions of Japan are a fusion of historical divisions and modern administrative needs".

The geography and administrative subdivisions of Japan have evolved and changed during the course of its history. Since the late-7th century, the regions of Japan have been grouped according to geographic position.

In the Meiji period, the modern regional system was made by Imperial decree. Japan was divided into regions ("chihō"). A regional council ("chihō gyōsei kyōgisai") was headed by the governor of the most powerful prefecture in the regional grouping. The council also included regional chiefs of central government ministries.
In this time, political development is marked by persistent loyalty to region and locality.

The Kansai region is used as a basic framework for description and comparison.

Since the late-7th century, the "Kinai" region, also known as "Go-Kinai", included the "Five Home Provinces" which surrounded the old capital city of Kyoto. In 645, "Kinai" was created as part of the Taika Reform. These lands are also called the Kansai region or Kinki. 

The Kantō region is used as a basic framework for description and comparison.

Since the late-7th century, the "Tōkaidō" region or "Eastern Sea Circuit" was made up of 15 provinces on the Pacific Ocean from Sendai Bay to "Kinai". Fuji-san, Tokyo, Yokohama, and other important or well-known places are in this region. "Tōkaidō" also names a road which connects the provincial capitals of this region on the island of Honshū.

The Tōhoku region is used as a basic framework for description and comparison.

Since the late-7th century, the "Tōsandō" region or "Eastern Mountain Circuit" was made up of 13 provinces. "Tōsandō" also names a road which connects the provincial capitals of this region on the island of Honshū. "Tōsandō" included Musashi Province after 711.

The Chūbu region is used as a basic framework for description and comparison. 

Since the late-7th century, the "Hokurikudō" region or the "Northern-land Circuit" was made up of 7 provinces on the Sea of Japan. "Hokurikudō" also names a road which connects the provincial capitals of this region on the island of Honshū.

The Chūgoku region is used as a basic framework for description and comparison.

Since the late-7th century, the "San'indō" region or "Mountain-shade Circuit" was made up of 8 provinces on the Sea of Japan. "San'indō" also names a road which connects the provincial capitals of this region on the island of Honshū.

Since the late-7th century, the "San'yōdō" region or "Mountain-sun Circuit" was made up of provinces on south or 'sunny' side of the mountains. "San'indō" also names a road which connects the 8 provincial capitals of this region on the island of Honshū.

The Shikoku region is used as a basic framework for description and comparison.

Since the late-7th century, the "Nankaidō" region or the "South-sea Circuit" made up of 6 provinces (the island of Awaji, the 4 provinces of Shikoku, and Kishiu on Honshū). "Nankaidō" also names a road which connects the provincial capitals of this region.

The Kyūshū region is used as a basic framework for description and comparison.

Since the late-7th century, the "Saikaidō" region or the "West-sea Circuit" was made up of the 9 provinces of the Kyūshū region. "Saikaidō" also names a road which connected the provincial capitals of this region.

After 1878, the region included the Ryukyu Islands.

The Hokkaidō region is used as a basic framework for description and comparison.
In the late 19th-century, the "Hokkaidō" region or "North Sea Circuit" was made up of the 10 provinces of Yezo. The Kurile Islands became an 11th northern province which was added in 1875.




