WWE Hall of Fame

The WWE Hall of Fame is a hall of fame for wrestlers thought by WWE to be very important. It started in 1993 when André the Giant died. He was the first to go in. Other people have been added in 1994, 1995, 1996, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012. Some choices for the Hall of Fame have not been popular like famous people who did not wrestle. Sometimes WWE will show Hall of Fame announcements and ceremonies on TV. 

The early Hall of Famers are the ones who helped build WWE and are considered pioneers. These include Arnold Skaaland, Buddy Rogers, Chief Jay Strongbow, Freddie Blassie, Gorilla Monsoon, Antonino Rocca, Ernie Ladd, The Fabulous Moolah, George "The Animal" Steele, The Grand Wizard, Ivan Putski and Pedro Morales. James Dudley was inducted for being a dear friend of the McMahon family and for being loyal to the company for a long time. Vince McMahon, Sr. was inducted because he first started WWE and might be the most important member. It is his family that still owns and runs the company to this day. Bobo Brazil was the first great black wrestling star. Killer Kowalski was a great villain wrestler. 

Later inductees included the top stars of the 1980s which was the greatest time in wrestling history. Those wrestlers are Jimmy Snuka, Pat Patterson, Lou Albano, "Cowboy" Bob Orton, Hulk Hogan, The Iron Sheik, classic manager Jimmy Hart, Nikolai Volkoff, Paul Orndorff and "Rowdy" Roddy Piper. An wrestler who usually lost his matches, Johnny Rodz was also inducted. The famous baseball legend Pete Rose was inducted to the surprise of many wrestling fans.

Wrestlers from the 1970s who were inducted are The Valiant Brothers (Jimmy and Johnny), "Superstar" Billy Graham and Peter Maivia. "Baron" Mikel Scicluna was inducted despite rarely winning. 

Other inductees included more great names from the 80s such as Big John Studd, Bobby Heenan, Don Muraco, Greg Valentine, Jesse Ventura, Junkyard Dog, Sgt. Slaughter, Tito Santana and Jim Duggan.

Harley Race, one of the great wrestlers of all time, was inducted during a time when WWE began to think about wrestlers who had more success in places other than WWE. These stars include Dory Funk, Jr., Terry Funk, Dusty Rhodes, Jerry "The King" Lawler, Nick Bockwinkel, The Sheik, commentator Gordon Solie, Verne Gagne, who started the American Wrestling Association (AWA) and won the AWA championship belt 10 times and promoter Eddie Graham.

More recent inductees include some of the greatest wrestlers in WWE history such as Shawn Michaels, Bret Hart, Eddie Guerrero, "Mr. Perfect" Curt Hennig, Ted DiBiase and former National Wrestling Alliance World Heavyweight Champions Ric Flair and Jack Brisco.

Other inductees include The Blackjacks (Mulligan and Lanza), Gene Okerlund, "Sensational" Sherri, Tony Atlas, Koko B. Ware, Mr. Fuji and The Wild Samoans (Afa and Sika). Football star William "The Refrigerator" Perry was inducted for being in a battle royale match at WrestleMania II. 

The rest of the WWE Hall of Fame are as follows:
Other celebrity inductees:



