Ramin Djawadi

Ramin Djawadi (born July 19, 1974) is a German-Iranian composer of orchestral music for movies and television. He was born in Duisburg, Germany to an Iranian father and German mother. Djawadi may be best known for his Grammy-nominated, guitar-driven score for "Iron Man" and for the TV series "Prison Break", "Game of Thrones" and "Person of Interest".

After graduating summa cum laude from Berklee College of Music in 1998, Djawadi got the attention of Hans Zimmer. Zimmer recruited him to Remote Control Productions. Djawadi moved to Los Angeles and worked as an assistant to Klaus Badelt. He wrote additional music on "The Time Machine", "Basic", "The Recruit" and the blockbuster "". He then worked with Zimmer on the score for "Thunderbirds", "Something's Gotta Give (movieething's Gotta Give" and "Batman Begins".

Djawadi then went out on his own with "", collaborating with The RZA for director David Goyer. This was the beginning of his relationship with Goyer for both movies and television. Djawadi wrote the score for Goyer's horror thriller "The Unborn", which was produced by Michael Bay. he also worked with Goyer on the television series "FlashForward". This earned him his second Emmy nomination. Djawadi also composed the Emmy-nominated theme music for "Prison Break" and the theme for the related show "Breakout Kings". Djawadi's score for the movie "Mr. Brooks" earned him a World Soundtrack Awards “Discovery of the Year” nomination. His other scores include "Deception", starring Hugh Jackman and Ewan McGregor, and Robert Towne's "Ask the Dust".

Djawadi scored the first Sony Animation project, "Open Season" as well as the sequel "Open Season 2". Other animation scores include "The Chubbchubbs Save Xmas". Djawadi's work in these movies got him noticed by the filmmakers of the Belgium-based NWave. They created one of the first animated movies in 3D, "Fly Me to the Moon". Djawadi finished Warner Brothers' "Clash of the Titans" in 2010. Djawadi also scored the soundtrack for the 2010 video game "Medal of Honor" and HBO's fantasy drama "Game of Thrones".

He is currently composing the music for the new J.J. Abrams TV series, "Person of Interest".

His usual orchestrators are Stephen Coleman and Tony Blondal


