Parveen Talukder

Parveen Talukder (b. 31 January 1958 is a Bangladeshi politician and businessperson. She is an Honorable Parliament Member of 9th National Assembly (Constituency 316, Barisal). In business, Talukder deals with the ready-made garments industry of Bangladesh.

Talukder was born in a Muslim family of Moheshpur Thana of Jhenaidah district on 31 January 1958.

She became involved in politics at a very early age, when she joined Dhaka Mohanagar Chatra League in 1973 and got elected the Assistant General Secretary of Shiddeshawry Degree College Chatra Sansad. Since then, she has been active in political movements and activities against violations of human rights.

She was elected Chairman of Nolua Union Parished, Bakergonj, Barisal for two consecutive terms, in the year 1997 and 2003. During 12 years as UP Chairman, she was very successful in improving the living standard of the people of Nolua Union. She played a large part in the creation of schools, roads and culverts, electrification and other infrastructural developments. Above all else, she is well known for her fighting against human rights violations and women and child abuse. Currently, she is the President of Bangladesh Mohila Awami League, Bakergonj, Barisal.
Praveen Talukder is a member of committee of Ministry of Environment and Forest. In addition to basic environmental issues, she has worked on climate change. Her work is most notable on the impacts and changes of national and regional climate issues. She took seat in Copenhagen Climate Change Conference2009 in Denmark and Cancun Climate Change Summit 2010 in Mexico.

Parveen Talukder takes personal interest in issues dealing with human rights and environmental protection. For her work on the matter she was awarded “Gold Medal 2009” by National Human Rights Journalist Organization.

Parveen Talukder is also a very successful entrepreneur. She has made a large contribution to the ready-made garments industry of Bangladesh. She is the Managing Director of Pretty Composite Textile Limited, and Pretty Woolwear Limited and Director of several other concerns of Pretty Group. She is also a former Director of Northern General Insurance Company Limited.


