Windom, Minnesota

Windom is a city in Cottonwood County, Minnesota, United States. The population was 4,646 at the 2010 census. It is the county seat of Cottonwood County.

Windom is a small farming town. It also has many parks including one with a disc golf course. The Des Moines River flows through Windom and some people canoe there.

The city was named for William Windom, who was a United States Senator from Minnesota from 1881–1883, and was United States Secretary of the Treasury under presidents James Garfield, Chester Arthur and Benjamin Harrison.

Windom is located at (43.866346, -95.116937). It is above sea level. The United States Census Bureau says that the city has a total area of 3.7 square miles (9.7 km²). 3.5 square miles (9.2 km²) of it is land and 0.2 square miles (0.5 km²) of it (5.08%) is water.

Windom is located in Minnesota's 1st congressional district, represented by Mankato educator Tim Walz, a Democrat. At the state level, Windom is located in Senate District 22, represented by Republican Doug Magnus, and in House District 22B, represented by Republican Rod Hamilton.

U.S. Highway 71, Minnesota Highway 60, and Minnesota Highway 62 are three of the main routes in the city.

Windom is home to one of 8 Toro manufacturing facilities. It is also the home to Big Game Treestands.

The local paper is the "Cottonwood County Citizen".
The local radio station is KDOM Radio.

Windom is home to three schools: Windom Area Middle/High School, Winfair Elementary School, and Red Rock Ridge ALC. It is also home to two preschools: Busy Bees and Sunshine School.

Windom Area Middle/High School is home to students grade 4-12 due to renovations in 2003. There are roughly 300 students attending the high school (grades 9-12) and 350 attending the middle school (grades 4-10). The school is led by Principal Eric Hanson and Superintendent Wayne Wormstadt.




Windom holds an annual summer festival called "Riverfest" during the second weekend of June. A pageant corresponds to this celebration which crowns a Miss Riverfest, a First Runner-Up, Miss Photogenic, Miss Congeniality and a Little Miss Riverfest. Other activities in this weekend celebration include: fireworks, Vickie Schendel 5K Walk/Run, tennis tourney, fishing tourney, turtle races, kiddie tractor pull, street dance, grand parade, and many more.

In February 2011 Windom started a new festival dubbed "Winter-River-Fest." Activities included a chili feed, open fires, dodge ball, snow sculpting, and the Darn Cold Croquet Contest.




