Total Drama

Total Drama is a television series. In the United States it airs on Cartoon Network. There are currently four "Total Drama" seasons with a two part season already ordered by Cartoon Network. All-Stars has completed airing as of 2014 while Pahkitew Island will premiere in the summer of 2014. June 12, 2008 - July 18, 2014 

There are currently six seasons in the "Total Drama" series that have aired below. The air dates listed in the table are from the original American airings.

"Total Drama Island" is the first season of the series. It first premiered on June 12, 2008 on Cartoon Network in the United States. This season takes place at Camp Wawanakwa, a fictional island located somewhere in Muskoka, Ontario where the season is based on a summer camp theme (although a contestant is eliminated at the end of every episode). Like the whole series, this season is a competition to see which of the twenty-two contestants will survive and last the longest. This is because the contestants are brutally tortured along the way through the intense challenges they are given. Challenges are sometimes based on other reality shows like "Fear Factor" and "Survivor". All of this is so that the winner of the season (the one to last the longest on the island and not get eliminated), will win a small fortune of C$100,000 and cheesy fame. Eliminated contestants are sent packing toward the Dock of Shame and must ride the Boat of Losers off the island.

"Total Drama Action" is the second season of the series. It premiered on June 11, 2009 on Cartoon Network in the United States It is a sequel to the first season of the series, "Total Drama Island". In this season, fourteen characters from "Total Drama Island" returned: Beth, Bridgette, DJ, Duncan, Geoff, Gwen, Harold, Heather, Izzy, Justin, Leshawna, Lindsay, Owen, and Trent. Courtney returns later on in the season due to a lawsuit. In this season, the contestants are taken to a brand new location: an old film lot in the center of Toronto, Ontario. The challenges are now based on movie genres, and the grand prize is now C$1,000,000. Cody, Eva, Ezekiel, Noah, Katie, Sadie, and Tyler do not return to compete, but still appeared for the aftermath special, an extra show which was hosted by Bridgette and Geoff, the first two eliminated contestants. All losers must take the Walk of Shame on the red carpet and ride the Lame-o-sine.

"Total Drama World Tour" is the third season of the series. It premiered on June 21, 2010 on Cartoon Network in United States. In this season, seventeen contestants are taken on a trip around the world as they compete in cultural themed challenges based on the countries or regions that they visit. An added twist in this season is that the contestants are required to break spontaneously into song, or else be immediately eliminated by Chris (although this rule was not strongly enforced, and no one was eliminated for not singing anyway). Fifteen of the original characters from "Total Drama Island" returned: Bridgette, Cody, Courtney, DJ, Duncan, Ezekiel, Gwen, Harold, Heather, Izzy, Leshawna, Noah, Lindsay, Owen, and Tyler. Two new characters, Alejandro and Sierra, also joined the cast at the beginning of this season. Additionally, a third new character, Blaineley, was brought on to compete past the halfway point of the season. Beth, Eva, Geoff, Justin, Katie, Sadie and Trent did not return to compete, but have instead appeared for the aftermath specials. The prize for this season is also C$1,000,000. People are eliminated by jumping off the Drop of Shame.

"Total Drama Revenge of the Island" is the fourth season of the series. The series' extension was commissioned by Cartoon Network from the producers, It premiered in the United States on June 5, 2012. This season returns to Camp Wawanakwa (the original setting of the first season), but no contestants from previous seasons return. Instead, a new set of thirteen contestants compete, which are Anne Maria, B, Brick, Cameron, Dakota, Dawn, Jo, Lightning, Mike, Sam, Scott, Staci, and Zoey. However, some characters from the original cast still have cameo appearances throughout the season. Also, due to the island being abandoned for the past two seasons, Chris had lent the island to a biohazardous waste dump company, causing the island to turn radioactive. This means that causes of radiation and toxic waste is the main theme for this season. This season only contains 14 episodes (half the length of a regular season), and the cash prize is once again C$1,000,000. People are eliminated off the island by the Hurl of Shame.

"Total Drama All-Stars" is the fifth season of the series. while the season premiered on September 10, 2013 on Cartoon Network in the United States. This segment is 13 episodes long, just like the previous season. "Total Drama All-Stars" features the fourteen most popular contestants from the previous two seasons, which are: Alejandro, Cameron, Courtney, Duncan, Gwen, Heather, Jo, Lightning, Lindsay, Evil Mike, Sam, Scott, Sierra, and Zoey. They all compete in several "Heroes vs. Villains" themed challenges, which means that the protagonists (heroes) team up and compete against the antagonists (villains). People will now be eliminated by taking the Flush of Shame and the winner once again takes home C$1,000,000.

"Total Drama Pahkitew Island" is the sixth season and was announced on June 11, 2013. It also consists of 13 episodes and take places at a new location, this time on an island called Camp Pahkitew located somewhere in Western Canada. A new set of fourteen contestants compete in this season, which are: Amy, Beardo, Dave, Ella, Jasmine, Leonard, Max, Rodney, Samey, Scarlett, Shawn, Sky, Sugar, and Topher. The season first aired on July 7, 2014 on Cartoon Network in the United States. Eliminations take place via the Cannon of Shame and features another one million dollar grand prize. Pahkitew Island features various similar elements to Camp Wawanakwa but the island is much bigger.



