Contigo Quiero Estar

"Contigo Quiero Estar" () is a song by American singer Selena. It was released as the lead single from "Selena" (1989). The single was released by EMI Latin on May 27, 1989. The song "Quiero Ser" (English: "I Want To Be") is the b-side track. The song's lyrics are about a women who wants to be near her lover. It was written by Mexican songwriter Alejandro Montealegre. "Contigo Quiero Estar" is a Tejano song mixed with folk and ranchera music.

The song did not get good reviews from music critics. "Contigo Quiero Estar" was nominated for Single of the Year at the 1990 Tejano Music Awards. Selena performed "Where Did the Feeling Go?", which was a demo she recorded. Many critics liked the song more than "Contigo Quiero Estar". "Contigo Quiero Estar" reached number eight on the US "Billboard" Hot Latin Songs chart in 1989. Many other artists have made cover versions of the song.

In 1989, Selena signed a recording contract with EMI Latin. That same year, she began recording songs for her debut album with them. Selena's record producer—brother A.B. Quintanilla III—was not allowed to produce any songs for her new album. Quintanilla III was interviewed for the "Selena: 20 Years of Music" series. This was recorded by Brian "Red" Moore, a family friend. Quintanilla III told Moore that EMI Latin did not want the family to be involved. He then said that they were already gambling on releasing a Latin division. Quintanilla III said that EMI Latin believed that the family could hurt the sales of the album. 

Selena's father and manager, Abraham Quintanilla, Jr. tried to persuade EMI Latin to give Quintanilla III a chance. Quintanilla Jr succeeded and Quintanilla III was allowed to produce the album, including the song "Contigo Quiero Estar". Mexican songwriter Alejandro Montealegre, sent in lyrics to EMI Latin. They then wanted Selena to record it. They believed it was similar with her other recorded songs.

The song is a mid-tempo Tejano song. It is mixed with folk and ranchera music. The song's instruments includes the drums, an electric keyboard, a french horn and the piano. The song's lyrics are about a women who wants to be next to her lover all the time. "Contigo Quiero Estar" was released as the lead single from "Selena" (1989). The b-side track included the song "Quiero Ser". They were released on May 27, 1989 by EMI Latin. 

The song did not get good reviews from music critics. A writer for "The Atlanta Journal-Constitution" believed "Contigo Quiero Estar" is one of the worst songs Selena ever recorded. Sally Jacobs of "The Boston Globe" wrote that Selena made a "mistake with this song." Carmina Danini of the "San Antonio Express-News" liked the Tejano sounds on "Contigo Quiero Estar". Dave Hoekstra of the "Chicago Sun-Times" called "Contigo Quiero Estar" a "weak ranchera song". A writer for the "Austin American-Statesman" gave the song a score of 2 out of a possible 5 star rating.

"Contigo Quiero Estar" was nominated for Single of the Year at the 1990 Tejano Music Awards. Selena performed "Where Did the Feeling Go?" rather than "Contigo Quiero Estar", which was a demo she recorded. Many critics liked "Where Did the Feeling Go?". They believed it was a better choice for a single. Ben Tavera King of the "San Antonio-Express News" liked "Where Did the Feeling Go?" more than "Contigo Quiero Estar".

The song reached number eight on the US "Billboard" Hot Latin Songs chart in 1989. Mexican band Los Reyes de Mexico recorded a mariachi version of the song. It was included on their album "Reyes De Mexico Lo Lindo Ti". Puerto Rican band Orquesta Armonia Show recorded both a merengue and a cumbia version. It was included on their album "Merengues y Cumbias".


Credits were taken from the single's booklet.


