The Bad Girls Club (season 7)

The Bad Girls Club: New Orleans is the seventh season of the reality television series "The Bad Girls Club". Filming began in February 2011 in Kenner, Louisiana and was originally scheduled to premier on July 11, 2011. The premier date was later changed to August 1, 2011. Becoming the second season to be filmed outside of the shows original filming location, season seven's theme is Mardi Gras.

Oxygen confirmed that there will be a seventh season of "The Bad Girls Club" several weeks before the season finale for season six. The show was called "Bad Girls Club Boot Camp" but was later changed to "Bad Girls Club: New Orleans". Filming started in February 2011 in Kenner, Louisiana. Several weeks later, basketball coach Bryon Scott allowed production at his mansion. Tamithia Shaw, for Interim Code Enforcement (ICE), said "[she] understands the [place] will be used for four months but that pre-production work apparently has been going on for two or three weeks". She also said that the cast was not there. This began to cause an outrage from neighbors.

The cast of season seven were asked to model for the "House of Lounge lingerie" at the New Orleans Fashion Week in March 2011.

On March 13, 2011, TMZ had announced that "The Bad Girls Club" were not allowed to be at eight clubs because the clubs did not want to be associated with the show's "bad image" (not a good reputation). Season seven's cast were also not allowed at a Mardi Gras party, hosted by Pierre Thomas.

On April 12, 2011 Tasha Malek, one of the cast, had made a complaint about another cast member, Natasia Townsend. Malek told the local police that Townsend was removing her personal items into a garbage bag, while telling her that "she needed to leave the house". This statement outraged Malek as she and Townsend began a physical fight and wrestled to the floor. They were later given summons by the police for disturbing the peace and disorderly conduct.

On May 9, 2011 the following cast were confirmed.

In every season of "The Bad Girls Club", one or more "bad girls" will be asked to leave the house from producers because, of violence, fighting, or they will leave on their own because of stress or family problems. This then gives producers a chance at a new "bad girl" who arrives to the house a day or two to replace the "bad girl" who was removed.




