Ludmilla Radchenko

Ludmilla Radchenko (, born November 11, 1978 in Omsk, Soviet Union) is a Russian model, artist and actress. She is best known in Italy and Anglo-Saxon countries.

Radchenko was born in Omsk. She graduated in fashion design in 1999. In 1997 she was elected "Miss Charm" at the national competition Miss Russia. She had television experiences in Moscow and St. Petersburg.

After she arrived in Italy, she began her career in an Italian spot during the television program "Paperissima". In 2001, she was a dancer in "" and, the following year, in the TV quiz "Passaparola".

In 2003, she hosted "Spicy Tg" on Antenna 3. During this time, she still modeled. In 2004 she was in the "Fox" magazine calendar. In 2005, she took part in the reality program "la Talpa". She was eliminated during the semi-finals.

In the summer of 2006, she was the main character of "On the Road", a TV program filmed in Miami. It was broadcast on the Italian television channel Italia 1. The next year, she hosted "Tuning and fanatics", a Diva's Production program on SKY. She was also a competitor in the reality program "Reality Game" on Sky Vivo.

She was chosen by window manufacturer Fapim for calendar 2008. She posed for Luca Cattoretti in the most famous erotic poses in the history of international cinema. She also works on All Music in the fashion program "Modeland". It is hosted by Jonathan Kashanian.

As an actress, she starred in the TV movie "Il viaggio" (2005). She was also in two episodes of the TV series "RIS - Delitti imperfetti" and some small roles in other Italian productions. In 2008, she stars in the movie "A Light Of Passion".

After La Talpa, she began painting. She has had some exhibitions in Milan and decides to devote herself to art.

In 2010, Radchenko made a giant cow for the "Cow Parade 2010", an international design exhibition. She also took part in an art installation at the Milan Triennale and exhibited in a solo show at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Lucca. A few months after her exhibition at Teatro alla Scala, she was chosen for the international painting Gemlucart of Monaco, where she began her collaboration with the Opera Gallery. In December 2010, Skira published her first catalog, "Power Pop". 

In February 2011, the province of Milan supported Radchenko's exhibition at the House of World Cultures. In May 2011, a New York gallery showed her work at the Eating Art festival. Her works were also exhibited at the Crown Fine Art gallery in Soho.






