Dokkyo Saitama High School

"Dokkyo Saitama Junior & Senior High School" is a private co-ed school. It consists of junior and senior high school students. The high school is in Koshigaya City,Saitama, Japan. Dokkyo Saitama High School was founded in 1982. About half of the students enter at the beginning of junior high school and the other half enter at the beginning of senior high school. Their classes are separate at the freshmen and junior grades. Then, students study in the same class during their senior year. About 15% of students that graduate from Dokkyo Saitama High School enter Dokkyo University to complete their education. Dokkyo has been a popular top private school in Saitama due to their small class sizes, more individual teaching and their international exchange program with other schools around the world.

In 1881, the Doitsu Gaku Kyokai (German Education Association) was established for people to study German culture and sciences to help with Japan's modernization into a developed country. In association, the Doitsu Gaku Kyokai Gakko (German Education Association School) was founded in 1883. It was the first junior high school in Japan to teach German.

In 1947, after World War II, the Doitsu Gaku Kyokai was renamed Dokkyo Gakuen(Dokkyo Educational Institution) and both Dokkyo junior and senior high schools were established in Mejiro in Tokyo.

In 1980, Dokkyo Saitama High School was established in Koshigaya City inSaitama, and in 2000 Dokkyo Saitama Junior High School was also established at the same campus. At that time, more than 4,200 students took the entrance exam.

In 2005, Dokkyo Saitama High School celebrated their 25th anniversary.

Dokkyo Saitama High School mission statement is Reclamation, Creation, Love and Faith.

Dokkyo Saitama Junior & Senior High School has a long tradition of providing educating to students that helps develop character using physical, moral and intellectual training. The school’s curriculum is made up of three basic goals to teach and encourage students to:




Because of the popular curriculum, high expectations and teaching styles of Dokkyo Saitama Junior & High School, getting into the High School can be difficult for the average student. The negative side to this is that after graduating from Dokkyo Saitama Junior & Senior High School it is difficult to get accepted into the top Japan colleges. 

The traditional event that takes place every year is the Ameisai (school festival), the athletic meet, where the student of the executive committee plays a key role and administration is accomplished. In Ameisai, a bell is rung in the early morning festival to be carried out after opening it to the public of the second day (general secrecy) and is carried out grandly. The athletic meet is the large part of the event where each student’s creativity and student participation come into play. These events consist of band and team dance, relay races, group competition (such as making unique headgear to use while competing in these relay races and dances). While the club activities opposition game is carried out, there is a tradition such as wearing a class T-shirt on the occasion of a competition.
In addition, Dokkyo Saitama Junior & Senior High School, Dokkyo Junior High School of Tokyo, and Dokkyo University all share a tradition in their historic background and founders, but have completely different traditions of their own.

Dokkyo Saitama High School is on a lot approximately . The grounds consists of a gym, baseball field, combined use, soccer and rugby field, track-and-field, 7 tennis courts, outdoor Olympic size swimming pool (25-metre, 9 course). In 2005 (the 25th anniversary commemorative project), the school added a second gym that is indoor and included two basketball courts two in conjunction with the first gym. There are fully equipped locker rooms in the classroom for the senior high school students, but the junior high school tower does not have locker rooms. There are 15 sport clubs and 8 artistic clubs.

Dokkyo Saitama High School mission statement is "Reclamation, Creation, Love and Faith".

School has 4 active international exchange programs.

Dokkyo Saitama High School is 20 minutes away from Sengendai Train Station (Tobu Isesaki Line) by walking. There is a school bus from the station to the school that takes only 5 minutes.


