Douglas Mawson

Sir Douglas Mawson OBE FRS FAA (1882–1958) was an Australian geologist, Antarctic explorer and academic. Mawson was a key expedition leader during the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration. The other key leaders were Roald Amundsen, Robert Falcon Scott and Ernest Shackleton.

Mawson was born in Shipley, West Yorkshire on 5 May 1882. When he was only two years old, his family immigrated to Australia and settled in Rooty Hill, New South Wales. He went to Fort Street Model School. Then he studied at the University of Sydney, where he graduated in 1902 with a Bachelor of Engineering. Mawson spent his life on Antarctic expeditions and academic work. He died in Brighton, South Australia on 14 October 1958.

Dates and details 
Douglas Mawson was born 5 may 1882 and he died 1958 so he lived until he was 76. Whilst he was at Cape Denison which is the windiest place on earth, that was constructed in 1911 . T After many deaths and setbacks, they sailed home after claiming the south pole with a flag in march 1909. 
Mawson was a member of Shackleton’s 1907–1909 British Antarctic Nimrod expedition.
Mawson’s own 1911–1914 expedition successfully charted Antarctic coastline, investigated the ocean between Australia and Antarctica and examined Macquarie Island.

Mawson, Mertz and Ninnis Far Eastern Journey left Main Base in November 1912. Mertz and Ninnis died, and heroically Mawson, struggled alone for 30 days, arriving at Main Base in February 1913.
He missed the boat and had to stay for another year.

They had to replace the radio antenna several times due to the fierce winds, so it was hard to communicate if something went wrong. 
Achievements
Mawson completed the longest Antarctic man-hauling sledge journey, of 122 days when he was on the Shackleton expedition. 

Mawson’s was the first expedition to use radio communications: enabling them to make meteorological reports,

Scientific advances made during the expedition included: work in cartography, geology, meteorology, aurora, geomagnetism, biology and marine science. Their land exploration included over 6437 km in Adelie Land, King George V Land and Queen Mary Land. They recorded features of the land and coast between 90° E and 155° E and at Macquarie Island. Biological species on land and sea, never before encountered by man, were described. Meteorological data was collected from all three bases.When he returned home he was knighted by king george V in 1914.
personal background 
he was born on a farm at Yorkshire ,England may 1882,he went to school at fort street public school and went to university at university of Sydney in Australia where he studied geology then to get a degree in geology. He then started to teach at the university of Adelaide were he rode a motorbike to gather rocks. He was married in 1914.

