Are We Not Men? We Are Devo!

Q: Are We Not Men? A: We Are Devo! is the first album released by the American new wave music band Devo. This album was produced by Brian Eno, recorded mostly in Cologne, Germany and released in the U.S. by Warner Bros. Records company in 1978.

The album received mixed reviews from critics when it was released. It reached number 12 on the UK album charts and number 78 on the U.S. "Billboard" charts. Recent reviews of the album have been mostly positive. This album is included on many "best of" lists from magazines such as "Rolling Stone", Pitchfork Media and "Spin".

Devo played the whole album live on stage for the first time on May 6, 2009. It was a part of the Don't Look Back (concert series)|Don't Look Back concert series. On September 16, 2009, Warner Bros. and Devo said they would re-release "Q: Are We Not Men?" and "Freedom of Choice", and that Devo would tour and perform both albums.

The first reaction by critics to "Q: Are We Not Men? A: We Are Devo!" was mixed. Tom Carson, wrote in "Rolling Stone" that "There's not an ounce of feeling anywhere, and the only commitment is to the distancing aesthetic of the put-on", and opined that "Devo lacks most of Eno's warmth and much of Bowie's flair for mechanized melodrama. For all its idiosyncrasies, the music here is utterly impersonal." Critic Robert Christgau gave the album a positive rating of a B+, but noted, "In small doses it's as good as novelty music ever gets, and there isn't a really bad cut on this album. But it leads nowhere." It was voted one of the best albums of the year in the "Village Voice"'s Pazz & Jop critics poll for 1978. In January 1980, "Trouser Press" also named it one of the best albums of 1978.

Later reception of the album has been mostly positive. Steve Huey of the online music database Allmusic scored the album four and a half "stars" calling it "arguably Devo's strongest set of material, though several brilliant peaks can overshadow the remainder", and "a seminal touchstone in the development of American new wave." "Q: Are We Not Men? A: We Are Devo!" is on "best of" lists, including "Spin"'s 50 Most Essential Punk Records, Pitchfork Media's top 100 albums of 1970s and "Rolling Stone"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time.
It is also listed in the book "1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die".




Album



