Attack on Titan

The series follows the story of Eren Jäger (a teenager boy), his adopted sister, Mikasa Ackerman, and their friend Armin Arlert (Emotional blond baby). They live in a world after the apocalypse caused by man-eating human-like giants called Titans, and they're members of what is likely the last surviving bit of civilization. Their civilization is surrounded by three protective walls called Wall Maria, Wall Rose, and Wall Sina. Eventually, Wall Maria, the outermost wall, is destroyed by the skinless Colossal Titan and the powerful big Armored Titan, leading other titans to infiltrate the outermost areas of civilization and begin their slaughter. The destruction that was caused by the titans kills Eren's mother and he vows revenge against the Titans. Eren enlists in the military and is also accompanied by Mikasa and Armin. Years after his first battle against the Titans, Eren finds out that he has the ability to transform into a Titan at will. After others found this out, Eren was seen as a threat to mankind by some but was also seen as a chance of hope by others. He later joins his companions to fight and protect what remains of their society while he also looks for answers to the mysteries surrounding the Titans, the Walls, as well as his own existence.

The anime was directed by Tetsurō Araki. It started broadcasting in Japan on July 8, 2013. It aired on MBS and ran from April 6, 2013 to September 28, 2013. Funimation intends to release the series in North America on home video in 2014.

The series has been highly praised and has won multiple awards including the Kodansha Manga Award in the shōnen category in 2011 and best director, best script, best soundtrack, runner-up for commercial, best theme song, top female character, and title of the year in the 3rd Newtype Anime Awards.

The series was nominated for both the 4th annual Manga Taishō award and the 16th annual Tezuka Osamu Cultural Prize.

The 2012 edition of Kono Manga ga Sugoi! named the series the 8th best manga series for male readers. Six of the seven English volumes that were published in North America have charted on The New York Times Manga Best Seller list for the week of October 13, 2013, with volume one having been on the list for 19 weeks. Volume one was #2 on Nielsen BookScan's list of top 20 graphic novels in American bookstores for August 2013, and for the month of September, the series had more volumes on the list than any other series. The series was also named one of the Young Adult Library Services Association's "Great Graphic Novels for Teens"



