Sébastien Caron

Sébastien Caron (born June 25, 1980) is a Canadian ice hockey goaltender that currently plays for Iserlohn Roosters of the DEL.

Before playing in the NHL, Caron played 2 seasons in the QMJHL for the Rimouski Oceanic where he won the Memorial Cup with them in 2000. He also won the Hap Emms Memorial Trophy for being the Memorial Cup Outstanding Goaltender.

He was drafted with the 86th overall pick in the 1999 NHL Entry draft by the Pittsburgh Penguins.

He played 3 seasons with the Penguins and 4 seasons with their AHL affiliate team, Wilkes-Barre/Scranton Penguins before having his contract bought out by the Penguins on June 25, 2006. He also played for Saguenay Fjord and Sorel-Tracy Mission during the 2004–05 NHL lockout.

On July 27, 2006, he was signed to a contract with the Chicago Blackhawks and he played 1 game with them before being traded along with Matt Keith and Chris Durno to Anaheim Ducks for P.A. Parenteau and Bruno St. Jacques.

During his time with the Ducks, Caron served as a spare goaltender in the 2007 playoffs. He was not called on to dress during the playoffs but was included in the Stanley Cup winning picture, and has a Stanley Cup ring from when the Ducks won the Stanley Cup. He did not however qualify to have his name engraved on the Stanley Cup since he only played one regular season game.

On April 1, 2010, he was signed by the Philadelphia Flyers but never played in net for Philadelphia during his short visit. He was the seventh goaltender acquired the Flyers' for the 2009–2010 NHL season.

He went on to play for HC Fribourg-Gotteron of the NLA for 3 seasons and was signed to a contract by Traktor Chelyabinsk of the KHL on August 23, 2010.

He played 12 games with Traktor and went back to the NLA to play for HC Lugano. He 14 games with them and returned to the NHL after the Tampa Bay Lightning signed him to a 1-year, one-way contract. He only played 3 games with them and was traded to the Nashville Predators, along with 3 draft picks for Kyle Wilson, Anders Lindback, and one draft pick. Instead of playing, Caron left to play for the Iserlohn Roosters of the DEL.



