Ancient Egyptian agriculture

Ancient Egyptian agriculture was probably the first to be practiced on a large scale. They grew staple food crops. These included grains such as emmer (a variety of wheat) and barley. The earliest evidence of irrigation in the Nile area is about 3100 BC.

They also grew flax for clothing and oil. Orchards 
and vegetable gardens were also common. Unlike other crops these were grown away from the areas flooded by the Nile river each year. Agriculture was the basis of the ancient Egyptian economy. It gave work and food for its people. It was a source of wealth for Egypt's elite. Egypt was the breadbasket (main provider of food) for much of the ancient world.

The geography of ancient Egypt was unlike that in other parts of the Mediterranean region, which had rainy winters and hot dry summers. In Egyptost of farming was done near in the Nile river valley and the Nile Delta. Egypt had little rainfall and the land had to be irrigated. This was from the Nile either when flooded or normally.

The Nile began to rise in the summer and go down again in late fall. The growing season was during the winter months. It was called "Sha-et" (the growing season). The second season was called "P' ru-et" (the dry season). This is the hot dry season when the grain was harvested and stored. The third season, "She" (sea) was the months during which the Nile flooded. Each season was about four months long. The fertile Nile valley is about 760 miles long and about 14 miles wide. The rest of Egypt is desert.

This system allowed one crop a year. A shorter agricultural season meant more workers available for construction of buildings like temples and other royal buildings. Workers were also used for year-round irrigation projects. Water was usually carried manually on men's shoulders using yokes.

To plant, they dug a hole in the ground, and put one seed in each hole. They used furrows. They grew wheat, barley, vegetables, figs, melons, pomegranates and vines. Crops were very important to Egyptians. They grew lettuce, cucumber, wheat, barley, figs, pomegranate and beans. Shemu was the harvesting season. Peret was the growing season. Akhet was the flooding season. In October, the river Nile left a layer of soil. Kemet is left behind from flooding. They grew their crops on the edge of the bank on the river Nile, then they waited for the Nile to flood and then all was left was soil to plant there crops.

The harvest season was called "Shemu". The reapers cut the grain with wooden sickles that had sharp flints. The cattle trampled over the cut grain. They tossed grain into the air so the breeze blew the useless chaff away. It was hard and slow. Harvest takes place in spring but finishes in May. Families hired workers to do the job. Everyone took part in harvest. Farmers had to barter. Many of them harvested crops to trade for the things and animals they needed to plant more crops.

Ancient Egyptians had tools like winnowing scoops, mattocks, flint bladed sickles and plows. All of the tools were simple and made by hand. The Egyptian plow had a small blade on it but did not cut the soil.

A Shaduf is an object used to collect water from the river Nile. The Shaduf works by pulling the string at the front and at the back there is a weight to stop it from falling forwards. Shadufs are used to get the water out of the Nile to water the crops.

Most animals were kept as food. Some animals were kept as pets. All kinds of animals were important to Egypt. Ancient Egyptians understood the animals. Animals they kept were goats, pigs, ducks, cows and geese.


