2014 FIFA World Cup Group G

Group G of the 2014 FIFA World Cup has the teams Germany, Portugal, Ghana and the United States. The first game begins of June 16, and the last game ends on June 26. Germany and the United States both moved on to the next round, while Germany won the group.

The two teams have met in 17 previous games, with the most recent game being won by Germany 1–0 in the UEFA Euro 2012.

Germany took the lead after Thomas Müller scored a penalty that was awarded to them after the foul by João Pereira. Mats Hummels doubled their advantage after he scored from a corner that was taken by Toni Kroos. Shortly before half time, Pepe got a red card and Thomas Müller scored again. Thomas Müller scored the final goal at the 78th minute, which finished the game at 4–0.

Previously, the two teams have met 2 times, both in World Cup matches. In the 2006 FIFA World Cup, Ghana defeated the United States 2–1 in the group stage, and in the 2010 FIFA World Cup, Ghana defeated the United States again 2–1 in the Round of 16.

Clint Dempsey scored one of the earliest goals in World Cup history, 30 seconds after the kickoff. The Americans were in the lead until André Ayew equalized the score at the 82nd minute. However, the Americans scored again just four minutes later from John Brooks header.

The teams met twice in history, including a match in the 2010 FIFA World Cup where Germany won 1–0. The two teams have brothers that will face each other, including Kevin-Prince Boateng of Ghana and Jérôme Boateng of Germany.

The Germans took the lead at the 51st minute after Thomas Müller's cross helped Mario Götze score. Ghana equalized three minutes later when André Ayew headed in Harrison Afful's corner. Ghana then took the lead when Philipp Lahm's pass was intercepted and given to Asamoah Gyan to score at the 63rd minute. Luckily for the Germans, Miroslav Klose equalized the score after a corner was taken by Toni Kroos. The goal became Klose's 15th world cup goal, equalizing Ronaldo's same record. He also joined players Pelé and Uwe Seeler as the only players to have scored in four FIFA World Cup's.

The teams have met in 5 games, including a match in the 2002 FIFA World Cup group stage which was won by the United States 3–2.

The game started perfectly for the Portuguese, as Nani scored at the 5th minute when Geoff Cameron's clearance landed at the feet of Nani. The game went on without goals until Jermaine Jones's goal equalized the game from a corner. The Americans took the lead after Clint Dempsey scored from Graham Zusi's cross. Luckily for the Portuguese, Varela scored at the last minute from a cross from Cristiano Ronaldo. Varela's goal was one of the latest goals in FIFA World Cup history.

The two teams have met 5 times, including a group stage match in the 1998 FIFA World Cup which was won by Germany 2–0, and a guarter-finals match in the 2002 FIFA World Cup which was also won by Germany 1–0. Current United States coach Jürgen Klinsmann played for Germany and also managed Germany in 2006.

The match was goaless until Thomas Müller scored his ninth World Cup goal at the 55th minute. The goal was the winning goal of the match, and Germany was victorious 1–0.

On this match, the two teams met for the first time.



