Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice

Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice is an American superhero movie. It is based on the DC Comics characters Superman, Batman and Wonder Woman. It was co-produced by Dune Entertainment and Syncopy Films. It was distributed by Warner Bros.

The movie is the sequel to 2013's "Man of Steel" and the second installment in the DC Cinematic Universe. The movie was directed by Zack Snyder. It was written by Chris Terrio, from a screenplay by David S. Goyer.

Gotham City's own vigilante, Batman, travels to Metropolis to take on Superman, fearing what would happen if the latter is kept unchecked. As Batman and Superman confront one another, a new threat arrives to put mankind in greater danger than it has previously known.


Additionally, Tao Okamoto plays Mercy Graves, Luthor's assistant. Scoot McNairy plays Wallace Keefe, an employee of Wayne Enterprises who is injured during the final events of "Man of Steel" and becomes a pawn in Lex's planl Patrick Wilson plays the President of the United States. Callan Mulvey plays Anatoli Knyazev. Michael Cassidy plays Jimmy Olsen. Jeffrey Dean Morgan and Lauren Cohan play Thomas and Martha Wayne, Bruce Wayne's deceased parents. Robin Atkin Downes voices Doomsday. Repeating their roles from "Man of Steel" are Harry Lennix as Secretary Calvin Swanwick, Christina Wren as Major Carrie Farris, Michael Shannon as General Zod, and Carla Gugino as the Kryptonian A.I. Kelor.

Ray Fisher, Jason Momoa and Ezra Miller appear as Victor Stone / Cyborg, Arthur Curry / Aquaman and Barry Allen / The Flash respectively in cameo appearances, which will lead into their inclusion in the "Justice League" film. Senator Patrick Leahy makes a cameo appearances as himself. Jena Malone was cast as Barbara Gordon, but her scenes were cut from the theatrical release. They will appear in the Ultimate Edition home media release.

The success of "Man of Steel" made Warner Bros. plans of a cinematic universe featuring other DC Comics characters. In June 2013, it was announced that director Zack Snyder and screenwriter David S. Goyer would both be returning for a "Man of Steel" sequel, which is being fast tracked by Warner Bros. Goyer had previously signed a three-movie deal, which includes "Man of Steel", its sequel, and a "Justice League" movie featuring Superman. The following month, Snyder confirmed at San Diego Comic-Con International that the sequel to "Man of Steel" would have Superman and Batman meeting for the first time in a movie.

Cavill, Adams, Lane, and Fishburne will repeat their roles. Snyder said that the movie would take inspiration from the comic "The Dark Knight Returns". In August 2013, Ben Affleck was announced to be playing Batman. Gal Gadot was cast as Wonder Woman in December 2013. Later in December, "Argo" screenwriter Chris Terrio was hired to rewrite the script, due to Goyer's commitments in other projects.

In January 2014, it was announced that the movie had been delayed from its original July 17, 2015 release date to May 6, 2016, and in May 2014, the movie's title was revealed to be "Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice". The date was moved again to March 25, 2016.

Pre-production began at East Los Angeles College in October 2013, with principal photography starting in May 2014 in Detroit, Michigan and in Chicago, Illinois.

With a production budget of $410 million, "Batman v Superman" is the most expensive film ever made at the time of its release, even after adjusting for inflation.

Filming began in 2013. Shooting locations were in Detroit, Michigan, Los Angeles, California, and Chicago, Illinois.



