Oddworld Inhabitants

Oddworld Inhabitants is the name of a company that publishes games that are set on the Oddworld universe. It was founded in 1994 by Lorne Lanning and Sherry McKenna. The company has been known for creating the Oddworld Quintology and that is to be finished. It is best known for it's four Oddworld games that were released from 1997 to 2005. The games include: Oddworld Abe's Oddysee, Oddworld Abe's Exoddus, Oddworld: Munch's Oddysee and Oddworld: Stranger's Wrath as well as two Gameboy and one Gameboy Advance games that were short versions of Abe's Oddysee, Abe's Exoddus and Munch's Oddysee. They were titled: Oddworld Adventures, Oddworld Adventures II and Munch's Oddysee. 

In 2005, Oddworld Inhabitants took a break from making video games. They ended up going into film industry and the company were planned to make a plannet like Oddworld called Citizen Siege.

The company are now back into making video games with help from a video game development company called Just Add Water (Developments) UK LTD. They only sell digital products as of 2008 when the original PC games went up on Steam. They also made available the original PS1 games on the Playstation Network store in 2010 for the PS3 and PSP. The classics were made avaliable for PS Vita in August 2012. They started work by porting the original Xbox version of Oddworld: Stranger's Wrath to PC. They then made an HD version and had several improvements made to it and it was released in 2011 for the PC and PS3. In 2012 Oddworld announced that Abe's Oddysee was getting a completely re-made game from the ground up and it's title which was chosen by fans is called Oddworld: New 'n' Tasty. They also released Oddworld: Munch's Oddysee HD for PS3 in December 2012. 

In 2013, it was announced that New 'n' Tasty will be coming Spring 2014 and at the Game Developers Conference in California, they announced it was coming soon. 

The developers originally stated that the "Oddworld" series would consist of five games referred to as the Quintology. Only two of those five games have been produced, while two additional games from the same universe were developed as expansion titles outside of the Quintology. Production on the Quintology's final three games was halted when the company decided to redirect its efforts toward film production. Those plans, too, were shelved. In 2009, a partnership was created with developers Just Add Water to continue developing the abandoned video games with Oddworld Inhabitants Inc. becoming the publisher of the titles. In order to raise the money to fund the rest of the Quintology, Just Add Water began by porting the studio's first two titles to new consoles and producing high definition remasters of "Oddworld: Munch's Oddysee" and "Stranger's Wrath". A high definition rebuild of "Oddworld: Abe's Oddysee" subtitled "New 'n' Tasty!" was next. Stewart Gilray has confirmed that all five Quintology games are titled Oddworld: X's Oddysee where X is the name of the protagonist.


