Torn

"Torn" is a song covered by Australian singer-songwriter Natalie Imbruglia from her debut album "Left of the Middle".
Imbruglia get for track a Grammy nomination for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance, losing to Celine Dion's "My Heart Will Go On".
The music video, directed by Alison Maclean shows Natalie Imbruglia singing along with the song are interspersed with footage of her and Jeremy Sheffield engaging in a romantically conversation. These couple of scenes turn out to be B-roll footage. During the last chorus, the apartment walls start wobbling and the crew comes to dismantle it. Natalie Imbruglia begins to dance during the finishing guitar solo as her "world" crumbles around her.

The video of the song was rated the second best video of all time by MTV Italy.
The physical single of Imbruglia's version of the song has sold more than 4 million copies worldwide, including more than 1 million copies in the UK alone. In the UK, it is the 85th biggest selling single of all time. The track peaked at #2 for three weeks, being held off the top spot by Aqua's "Barbie Girl" and then dropped to #4. As a result, the song is the second biggest-selling single in history not to have topped the UK Singles Chart. On September 24, 2007, Natalie Imbruglia's version of the song re-entered the UK Singles Chart at #70, on the strength of digital sales after her greatest hits album was released. In the Flanders region of Belgium, the single peaked at a number one for 7 weeks and charted for 22 weeks.

As of 2011, "Torn" holds the record for most played song on Australian radio since 1990, played more than 300,500 times since its 1998 release.

In the United States, the song peaked at #1 on the Hot 100 Airplay chart for 11 consecutive weeks.

In 2003, "Torn" was declared the No. 1 Best Pop Song on a top 10 list, part of a larger collection of songs by Q magazine in their special edition 1001 Best Songs Ever. Billboard ranked "Torn" the No. 26 Best Pop Song based only on pop radio charts compiled between 1992–2012.
<div style="float:left">

<div style="float:left">


