Korea-Yonsei Match

Korea-Yonsei Match (Yonsei-Korea Match) is a sport event held in every Fall between two Korean prominent private universities(Korea University and Yonsei University) located in Seoul, Korea. The event consist of five sports: Baseball, basketball, soccer, rugby, and ice hockey. The event started in 1956, with all 5 sports included. The origin of Korea-Yonsei Match (Yonsei-Korea Match) is a tennis competition round between players of Bosung college which is former Korea University and Yonhui college which is former Yonsei University which was held in May 30, 1925. After the match, the two schools got into another competition in 1927. This time the two school collided in a soccer match. Korea University and Yonsei University had other matches after the match and it was almost annually held. It was not officially annual then. Since the period was the period of Japanese colonial era in Korea, the competition of two schools grew as a national event of Korea.

Official Korea-Yonsei Match has been continued since 1965, in remembrance of event during Japanese colonial era. From the official first match, the sports of Korea-Yonsei match is fixed to five sports: baseball, basketball, ice hockey, rugby, and soccer. Below is the result of each year.

Korea-Yonsei Match also plays a role of the biggest festival of both Korea and Yonsei university. The two university shows another college rivalry like Harvard verses Yale University, Stanford University verses UC Berkeley, and in Korea, KAIST verses POSTECH, since they are the top two most famous private universities. During the Korea-Yonsei match, stores of each hometown, Anam and Sinchon, put many placards humiliating the rival in the streets. Huge festival in thrown in each town biannually. Festival takes place in Anam in even number years and in Sinchon in odd number years.

One of the customs takes place during the festival is 'human train march'. People from each department make a long line and put their hands on the shoulder of front person making a long train-like rows. The human trains marches and wanders through streets. They ask for side-dishes and bottles of alcohol to the owners of the stores, restaurants and bars. The alumni and university student council pre-pay for the side-dishes and bottles of alcohol to the owners. The human trains make themselves full and drunk enough then move to bars they have made reservation.

Cheering for each team is a huge joy for the students of both university. Students dance to the cheering anthems and sing along with them. The most popular and famous cheering anthems are Minjokui Aria(Aria of People), Batnorae(Sailing song) in Korea University and Yonseireul Saranghanda(I love Yonsei), Wonsirim(Virgin Forest) in Yonsei University. Each university sings Batnorae and Wonsirim when the team scores in each sports events. There is a joint cheering event between two university twice a year. Students practice their cheering in the two joint events and also cheering learning time in their orientation camp.


