Roman Reigns

Leati Joseph "Joe" Anoa'i (born May 25, 1985 in Pensacola, Florida) better known by his ring name Roman Reigns is a professionnal wrestler in the WWE. He is a member of the Anoa'i family which is a renowned Samoan-American wrestling dynasty.

He was a member of The Shield along with Dean Ambrose and Seth Rollins, until Rollins betrayed them live on Raw on the 2nd of June, 2014. 

Before he started his professional wrestling career, Reigns played football at the Georgia Institute of Technology and was named first-team All-ACC his senior year. He went undrafted in the 2007 NFL Draft but ended up being signed by the Minnesota Vikings. He was picked up by the Jacksonville Jaguars to provide depth at defensive end to their roster and in 2008 he was signed by the Edmonton Eskimos of the CFL and accepted a spot on the team's practice roster.

In July 2010, he was signed to a developmental contract with World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) and was put on their developmental territory Florida Championship Wrestling (FCW). He debuted under the ring name Roman Leakee on September 9, 2010 and competed in a singles match that resulted in a loss to Richie Steamboat. He then lost to Idol Stevens and Wes Brisco and finally earned his first win on September 21 in a match against Fahd Rakman.

In late 2011, he formed a team with Donny Marlow and they challenged the Florida Tag Team Champions Calvin Raines and Big E Langston on July 8 but were unsuccessful in winning their match. On the February 5 episode of FCW television, he defeated Dean Ambrose and Seth Rollins in a triple threat match to become the number one contender for the FCW Florida Heavyweight Championship but he was unable to win the championship when he was defeated by champion Kruger. He was able to win the Florida Tag Team Championship with Mike Dalton before they lost the belts to CJ Parker and Jason Jordan.

Roman Reigns along with Dean Ambrose and Seth Rollins, made their main roster television debut on November 18, 2012 at the Survivor Series pay-per-view alongside, triple-powerbombing Ryback through the announce table during the triple threat main event for the WWE Championship, which allowed CM Punk to pin John Cena after an earlier Shell Shock from Ryback to retain the title. The three of them declared themselves as "The Shield" and vowed to rally against "injustice."






