Algarve

The Algarve (from "al-Gharb" "the West") is the southernmost region of continental Portugal. The capital of the Algarve is the city of Faro. There is an international airport and a public university (University of Algarve).

The present region of Algarve coincides with the old province of the same name and with the Faro district. The main economic activity in the region is tourism because its beaches and its historical buildings.

The name Algarve comes from "Gharb Al-Andalus" (, "gharb al-ʼandalus"; "The West of Al-Andalus"), or just Al-Gharb (, "al-gharb"; "The West"), the name given by the Muslims of Iberia to the region to the west of Andalusia.

Algarve has an area of . It borders with the Alentejo region (Alentejo Litoral and Baixo Alentejo subregions) to the north, the Atlantic Ocean to the west and south, and the Guadiana river, and Andalusia (Spain), to the east.

The Algarve region is divided in two zones, each with eight municipalities:

The main mountain ranges are "Serra de Monchique", la "Serra de Espinhaço de Cão" and "Serra do Caldeirão". The highest point in the region is the Fóia mountain, high, in the "Serra de Monchique" mountain range.

The westernmost point of the region, and of continental Europa, is Cape St. Vincent (), in the municipality of Vila do Bispo.

Algarve is formed by 16 municipalities (or "concelhos") and 67 "freguesias".

Among the 16 municipalities, Loulé is the largest of the region, with an área of ; this municipality and Silves border both the Alentejo region and the Atlantic Ocean. Vila Real de Santo António is the smallest municipality with an área of .

Only three municipalities do not border the ocean: Monchique, São Brás de Alportel and Alcoutim.

Farming products of the region include fig, almond, orange, carob bean, strawberry tree and cork oak. Horticulture is also important. Fishing and aquaculture are important activities in the coastal area of Algarve.

The wines of the region are well-known. There are four wines in the region which have Protected Designation of Origin ("Denominação de Origem Controlada" – DOC): Lagoa DOC, Lagos DOC, Portimão DOC and Tavira DOC.

Food processing, cement and construction, are the main industries.

Tourism related activities are extensive and make the bulk of Algarve's economy during summer time.



