Millau

Millau is a commune in southern France, in the Aveyron department, region of Occitanie. It is the "sous-prefecture" (capital) of the "arrondissement" of the same name in the Aveyron department. It is also the capital of two "cantons": Millau-1 and Millau-2.

The territory of the municipality is part of the Regional Natural Park of Grands Causses.

During the first century, there was an important settlement where the Tarn and Dourbie rivers meet; this settlement, a couple of kilometres from the current city, was known because here there was an important centre of production of fine ceramics that were exported to many places of the Roman Empire.

The town is in the valley of the Tarn river and is at the confluence of the Tarn and Dourbie rivers. The territory of the "commune" is in the Grand Causses over part of the Causse Rouge (to the east of the Lévézou plateau), the Causse du Larzac, and the Causse Noir.

The "commune" is at from Paris, from Rodez, from Marseille, from Bordeaux and from Toulouse.

Millau has an area of , and its average altitude in the city is ; at the city hall, the altitude is .

The "commune" of Millau is surrounded by the "communes" Aguessac, Compeyre, Paulhe, Comprégnac, Creissels, Saint-Georges-de-Luzençon, Lapanouse-de-Cernon, La Cavalerie, Nant, La Cresse, La Roque-Sainte-Marguerite, Castelnau-Pégayrols, Saint-Beauzély y Verrières.

The climate of the Millau is subtropical with dry-summer, Csb (Mediterranean Climate) in the Köppen climate classification.

The average temperature for the year in Millau is . The warmest month, on average, is July with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Millau is . The month with the most precipitation on average is September with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is July with an average of .

The inhabitants of Millau are known, in French, as "millavois" (women: "millavoises").

With a population of 22,064, Millau has a population density of inhabitants/km.

Evolution of the population in Millau

Millau forms with Creissels the urban area of Millau with a population of 23,778 inhabitants (2013) and an area of . This urban area is the centre of the metropolitan area of Millau, formed by 13 "communes" with a population of 28,793 inhabitants and an area of .

Millau is a subprefecture of the Aveyron department, the capital of the "arrondissement" of Millau and the administrative centre () of two cantons

It is part of the intercommunality "Millau Grands Causses" ().

Millau is twinned with:
The Millau Viaduct is a cable-stayed bridge that spans the valley of the Tarn river near Millau.



