Singles (movie)

Singles is a 1992 romantic comedy-drama movie. It was written and directed by Cameron Crowe. The movie stars Bridget Fonda, Campbell Scott, Kyra Sedgwick, and Matt Dillon. The movie was distributed by Warner Bros. studios.

"Singles" tells the story of the romantic lives of a group of young Gen X'ers in Seattle, Washington, during the 1990s grunge music scene. Most of the characters live in a block of apartments. A sign in front of the building advertises "Singles" for rent (single bedroom apartments for one or two people).

"Singles" got positive reviews from the critics. It was released on September 18, 1992.

The movie includes cameos from popular bands in the Seattle music scene, such as Pearl Jam, Alice in Chains, and Soundgarden. Stone Gossard, Jeff Ament, and Eddie Vedder, all in Pearl Jam, appear as members of Matt Dillon's band Citizen Dick. Their parts were made when Pearl Jam was still named Mookie Blaylock and hadn't yet released an album. 

Soundgarden singer Chris Cornell has a cameo as the guy who comes out from his apartment to listen to a very loud car stereo. He also appears in a later scene with Soundgarden playing their song "Birth Ritual". The members of Alice in Chains also appear in the movie as a bar band, playing their songs "It Ain't Like That" and "Would?". 

The movie was made at some popular places around Seattle. It includes scenes at Pike Place Fish Market, Gas Works Park, Capitol Hill, and Jimi Hendrix's grave at Greenwood Memorial Park in Renton. The coffee shop that is in many scenes is the now-closed OK Hotel. The apartment building is on the northwest corner of the intersection of East Thomas Street and 19th Ave East. 

Most of Matt Dillon's wardrobe in the movie belonged to Pearl Jam bassist Jeff Ament. 

Ament made up a list of 'pretend' song titles for the fictional band, Citizen Dick. Chris Cornell then wrote songs for the movie using those titles, and "Spoonman" was one of them. An early acoustic version of the song was made. It can be heard in the background during a scene of the movie. Citizen Dick's song name "Touch Me, I'm Dick" is a parody on the song "Touch Me, I'm Sick" by the Seattle band, Mudhoney.



