The Frugal Gourmet

The Frugal Gourmet is an American half-hour cooking show. The show started around 1973 at Tacoma's public-TV station KTPS-TV. It was first called "Cooking Fish Creatively". Later it was renamed "The Frugal Gourmet". The award winning program was hosted by Jeff Smith. 

Jeff Smith was the chaplain at the University of Puget Sound in Tacoma, Washington. In the late 1960s he taught a class called ”Food as Sacrament and Celebration". In 1972, he left the university and opened a restaurant called 'the Chaplain’s Pantry'. In 1973, a local PBS television station KTPS-TV offered him his own cooking show, called "Cooking Fish Creatively". "I had a producer who couldn't produce, a director who couldn't direct, a technician who couldn't tech, and I wasn't so good, either", according to Smith. The show received two Emmy nominations. The show won a 'Best of the West' Award for Educational Television in 1976. After several seasons it was renamed "The Frugal Gourmet". The name change was suggested by his wife, Patty. 

The Frugal Gourmet ran on PBS from 1983 to 1997. It was PBS's most popular cooking show. Smith always wore a blue and white striped apron that became his "trademark". In 1986 Smith was joined by Craig Wollam, a professionally trained Chef. Smith met Wollam by accident in a Chicago restaurant and he was hired the next day. He stayed until the show was cancelled in 1997.
For the first seven seasons starting in 1983, the show was produced at by WTTW in Chicago. From 1990 it was produced by A La Carte Productions.

During each show Smith followed a recipe showing how to prepare a dish. He showed food from many different cultures. The show always ended with Smith saying "Until I see you again, this is the Frugal Gourmet; I bid you peace, bye-bye". Smith would remind his audience that "frugal" doesn't mean cheap. It means that you don't waste money. And "gourmet" means loving good food and wine.

The theme music for "The Frugal Gourmet" was the Bourree movement from "Water Music" by George Frideric Handel.



