AMC (TV channel)

AMC is an American cable and satellite television channel. The channel is owned by AMC Networks and airs television shows and movies. AMC stands for American Movie Classics, which the channel was first based around. Currently is referred to as AMC due to its primary shift from only movies to also featuring television shows.

In 1984 on October 1, the AMC television channel aired for the time as a premium channel, showing only movie classics. It was on in the evening, and frequently held special events such as marathons and sometimes movies that generally weren't aired as classics. In 1988 it had been recorded that AMC had 39 million subscribers in the United States, making it one of the most subscribed to premium channels. Two years later, in 1990, AMC started airing 24 hours, and had been picked up by most cable providers.

In 2002 AMC switched from airing only movie classics to modern movies of all genres and television shows. During this switch, they also started using a new logo "Story Matters Here". In 2004 AMC aired its first original show called "Film Fakers". After the success of the show, AMC started adding more original series and movies. The first original drama series, "Mad Men". The show received a large amount of views and great feedback, resulting in a boom of original shows such as "Breaking Bad" and "Hell on Wheels".

After many television awards and critical acclaim from shows like "Mad Men" and "Breaking Bad", AMC started creating many more original shows. During this change, AMC created its well known slogan, "Story Matters Here". The slogan referred to the many shows that had created at the time, many of which had been praised great stories told through them. It was also during this time that "The Walking Dead" TV show was announced and aired. Currently it holds the title as most watched scripted cable show in history.

Currently, AMC has left its previous slogan for "Something More". It is continuing to air The Walking Dead, which is on its seventh season, along with new shows such as "Comic Book Men" and "Small Town Security". It has been announced that it will be picking up two new shows, "Halt & Catch Fire" and "Turn", two period dramas that will be airing in 2014. This year, the only new show is "Mob City", a scripted show about the Los Angeles Police Department.




AMCTV.com is an website provides special features for users, such as the airing schedule, blogs, videos, games.

This online feature allows viewers to see what date and time shows are airing, as well as when new episodes will be available. Another the schedule allows users to do, is know when AMC movies will be airing. A recently added ability allows users to see all of when a specific episode is going to be rerun.

Videos provides behind the scenes looks at many of the shows, as well as previews for upcoming episodes. Although the videos are usually fairly short, consisting around a three minutes long, they provide fans with small bits of special information that most viewers want to see.

The blogs consists of short stories about certain episodes for different shows. These blogs, are all made by AMC editors, and usually don't contain any useful information about new shows or episodes. This feature is the least used, and the least updated.

The category of games, is filled with trivia questions for selected shows, having the only possibilities being getting the answer right, getting it wrong, and running out of time on the timer. Recently, trivia questions for movies have been added in this category along with the television shows.



