Alexander Tenenbaum

Alexander Tenenbaum (Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University) is an Israeli medical doctor, university professor, and researcher in the fields of cardiology and diabetes.

Tenenbaum was born in Frunze, former Soviet Union, in 1956. This is where he graduated with a medical degree in 1978. He received a PhD in 1986. Tenenbaum’s research was in the areas of high-altitude medicine heart failure and pulmonary hypertension.

Tenenbaum immigrated to Israel in 1989. He started his work at Sheba Medical Center. During the next twenty years he held several different jobs at this hospital. These included residency in cardiology at the Heart Institute. He was also responsible for the Echocardiography Laboratory at the Cardiac Rehabilitation Institute. In 2003 he was appointed Deputy Director of the institute. Currently he is a Scientific Director at the same institute.

Tenenbaum is author or coauthor of about 200 scientific publications. Most of them are original research articles published in critically peer-reviewed renowned medical journals. His research included several areas, including echocardiography, cardiac CT, heart failure, cardiac calcification and cardiac rehabilitation. Tenenbaum was especially involved in the research of various aspects of metabolic syndrome, insulin resistance, obesity and the diabetes/cardiovascular interrelationship including residual risk concept.

As a result of the efforts of Tenenbaum and his colleagues from many countries, a strong correlation between cardiovascular disease and diabetes is widely established nowadays. A new branch of medicine, cardiovascular diabetology, was set up later.

In 2002 Tenenbaum and Prof. Fisman founded an international scientific journal named "Cardiovascular Diabetology" (BioMed Central, Springer Sciences Media Group, London). It was dedicated to all aspects of the diabetes/cardiovascular interrelationship. "Cardiovascular Diabetology" now is the world’s foremost journal specifically devoted to this issue. It has the highest Impact Factor among journals of similar field. Tenenbaum serves as Co-Editor-in-Chief of Cardiovascular Diabetology.

In 2006, Tenenbaum was nominated Professor of Cardiology at Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University. Besides his accomplishments as an investigator, Dr. Tenenbaum has had a distinguished contribution as a medical educator both for Israeli and foreign students and cardiologists. He has organized the program for Continuous Medical Education of cardiologists from the former Soviet Union.

Tenenbaum worked for the advancement of the Israel Heart Society and international organizations of cardiologists. He was Governor of The International Society of Cardiovascular Pharmacotherapy, Co-founder and Chairman of the Israeli Heart Society Working Group on Cardiovascular Pharmacology and Drug Therapy and Co-founder and Secretary General of the Cardiovascular Diabetology Research Foundation.

Tenenbaum received many international and Israeli scientific awards. They include the Jan J. Kellermann Award and the Henry Neufeld Prize.


