Vibrator (sensual)

A vibrator is a device that is made to vibrate against the body, thereby stimulating the nerves and giving a pleasurable and possibly erotic feeling.

The electrically powered vibrator was invented in the 1880s by doctors, who were treating women for "hysteria" for centuries by performing what today would be considered masturbation. At the time, however, not only did doctors regard the "vulvular stimulation" required as having nothing to do with sex, they reportedly found that it took a lot of time to do and it was hard work. The vibrator did it more quickly and easily, and because of this it was very popular with doctors. Home versions soon started being made and they were also popular, with adverts in places like "Needlecraft", "Woman's Home Companion", "Modern Priscilla" and the Sears catalog. These disappeared in the 1920s, apparently because their appearance in pornography made it no longer tenable for polite society to avoid the sexual connotations of the devices.
As "body massagers", millions of vibrators have been sold to both men and women. Some people that buy vibrators only use them for pains. However, many people who purchase vibrators marketed as "body massagers" — and, presumably, most people who purchase vibrators marketed as adult toys — use them to get sexual pleasure, most often in masturbation. Vibrators often allow people to achieve orgasm faster and easier and are often said to provide stronger orgasms. They are often recommended by sex therapists for women who have difficulty reaching orgasm by other means. Couples also use them sometimes.

Harper's magazine notes a Durex survey that says 46% of women have vibrators near 2006. This may have been market research relating to their vibrating condom base product.

The sale of vibrators and similar items is forbidden in several states in the southern United States. In Texas, the sale of vibrators and dildos is technically illegal, but many stores will sell such items provided that the customer sign a statement that the device will be used only for educational purposes. The states of Georgia, Alabama, Mississippi, Indiana, Virginia, Louisiana and Massachusetts also have laws that prohibit vibrators.

An enormous range of vibrators exist, falling into several broad categories:

Most vibrators use internal batteries, but some of them have a power cord and must be plugged into a power socket to work.




