Mark Fitzpatrick

Mark Fitzpatrick (born November 13, 1968 in Toronto, Ontario) is a Canadian retired ice hockey goaltender. 

Before playing in the NHL, Cloutier played 1 season in the BCJHL with the Revelstoke Rangers and 3 seasons in the WHL with the Medicine Hat Tigers whom he won the Memorial Cup twice with.

He was drafted by the Los Angeles Kings with the 27th overall pick in the 1987 NHL Entry draft. He played 17 games with the Kings and on February 22, 1989 he was traded along with Wayne McBean to the New York Islanders in exchange for Kelly Hrudey. He played 2 seasons with the Islanders. During his time with them, Fitzpatrick contracted Eosinophilia–myalgia syndrome, which is a potentially fatal neurological disease and it cost him almost all of the 1990-91 NHL season. He was able to recover and he returned to the ice in February 1992. He won the Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy for his efforts in returning to the league after the illness in 1992.

On June 20, 1993, during the expansion draft for the Florida Panthers and the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, he was traded to the Quebec Nordiques for Ron Hextall and a swap of first-round picks. After only four days, he was claimed in the expansion draft by the Panthers. He played 5 seasons with the Panthers where he played as a backup goaltender to John Vanbiesbrouck.

On January 16, 1998, he was traded to the Tampa Bay Lightning with Jody Hull for Dino Ciccarelli and Jeff Norton. During his time in Tampa, he only managed record 7 wins in 34 games for the struggling Lightning who finished the season with the worst record in the NHL.

He was traded to the Chicago Blackhawks for Michal Sykora where he spent the season as a backup capacity to Jocelyn Thibault. He moved to Carolina Hurricanes for the 1999–2000 NHL season but spent most of the year playing in the International Hockey League for the Cincinnati Cyclones. He only played 3 games for the Carolina Hurricanes and spent another season in the IHL for the Detroit Vipers before he retired from playing professional ice hockey in 2001.



