TNA King of the Mountain Championship

The TNA King of the Mountain Championship is a professional wrestling championship in Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA). The championship was debuted on the October 23, 2008 episode of "TNA Impact!" and was originally called the "TNA Legends Championship". It was considered the second highest-ranking title in TNA. It was declared defunct by the (storyline) TNA Executive Director Kurt Angle on July 3, 2014. The title was reactivated under the new name "TNA King of the Mountain Championship" on June 25, 2015.

Booker T revealed the championship after he took it out of a steel briefcase that he had been carrying around in the weeks leading up to the reveal. He named it the "TNA Legends Championship" and declared himself as the first champion. A.J. Styles defeated Booker T at Destination X on March 15, 2009 to win the championship.

Winning the title made Styles the first-ever TNA Grand Slam Champion after he had won the World Heavyweight (NWA or TNA), the World Tag Team (NWA or TNA), and the TNA X Division Championship along with the Legends Championship. The Management Director of TNA Jim Cornette announced that the Championship became an official TNA sanctioned championship because Styles defeated Booker T for it legally by the contract the two had signed to make the match official.

When Eric Young held the championship, he renamed it the "TNA Global Championship" on the October 29, 2009 episode of "Impact!" and said that he was not going to defend it against any American wrestlers or on American soil. Young was defeated by Rob Terry during a live event in Cardiff, Wales on January 27, 2010.

Terry lost the championship to A.J. Styles on the July 22 episode of "Impact!". Styles renamed it the "TNA Television Championship" on the July 29 episode.

On July 3, 2014, the TNA Executive Director Kurt Angle declared that the Television Championship would become inactive.

On June 25, 2015, the championship was reactivated under the new name "TNA King of the Mountain Championship." It was announced by TNA that there would be a new champion crowned in a King of the Mountain match at Slammiversary. At Slammiversary, Jeff Jarrett defeated Matt Hardy, Eric Young, Drew Galloway, and Bobby Roode to win the championship. Since Jarrett was the founder and running GFW, there were suspicions of Jarrett defending the championship in GFW. The championship did appear at a GFW live event on July 9 where Young attacked Jarrett and stole the championship.

The current champion is Bobby Roode. Roode is in his first reign as champion. He won the championship after defeating PJ Black during "Impact Wrestling" tapings on July 28, 2015.

The first champion was Booker T. He awarded himself the championship on the October 23, 2008 episode of "Impact!". The longest reigns in the championship's history was Abyss' second reign which lasted 396 days. The shortest reign was PJ Black's first reign which lasted only 1 day. 



