Bogan

The term bogan () is an Australian and New Zealander slang word. It can be used to describe a person with a working class background. Or it can be someone whose speech, clothing, attitude and behaviour display a proud working class attitude. Sometimes the word can have a negative meaning. Over the last several decades, the bogan has become a very widespread and well respected group. There are many local names that describe the same or similar groups of people.

Bogans are often thought to be people who live in the outer suburbs of larger cities. They are less keen on dental hygiene than others. They also tend to be wiktanti-authority, proud of their country, have home done tattoos, love classic rock, love Peter Brock, hoon around and drink a lot of alcohol. A bogan attitude is not pretentious and is very honest.

Some types of clothing are associated with bogans. These include flannelette shirts, monkey hoodies, Stubbies shorts, King Gee workwear, thongs and Ugg boots. They also wear jeans and black leggings. Victorian Bogans typically wear acid wash jeans, ugg boots, and band T-shirts with mullet style haircuts. In the mid 1990s, New Zealand Bogans were typically dressed in all black. Super-taper black jeans were fairly standard and black woollen jerseys. Long fringe or long hair in general was also common.

Vehicles such as the Holden Commodore and Ford Falcon, are also common among bogans.

Bogans typically do not copy middle-class styles of taste, diet, hobbies, fashion and language. Bogans are sometimes looked down upon by some other groups. This can make the lives of disadvantaged people much tougher.

The term bogan is nowadays used to display a pride in being rough around the edges. In 2002, Michelle Griffin discussed the fact that ‘bogan’ is no longer being used as an insult. It is in fact a way to identify with the ‘Aussie’ culture that many Anglo‐Saxon Australian citizens are so proud of. In the past, bogan was a bad term. Now many take pride in being called a bogan. Radio station Triple J held a "National Bogan Day" on 28 June 2002, which they commemorated by playing music by bands such as Cold Chisel, Midnight Oil, Rose Tattoo and AC/DC.



