H. H. Holmes

Herman Webster Mudgett (May 16, 1861 – May 7, 1896), better known under the name of Dr. Henry Howard Holmes, was one of the first documented serial killers in the modern sense of the term. He was born in Gilmanton, New Hampshire. A graduate of the University of Michigan medical School Class of 1884; until his .execution in 1896 he would choose a career of crime including Insurance fraud, swindling; check forging; bigamous illegal marriages; murder and horse theft. 

In Chicago at the time of the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition, Holmes opened a hotel which he had designed and built for himself specifically with murder in mind, and which was the location of many of his murders. While he confessed to 27 murders

Contemporary newspaper accounts reported several known or suspected victims of Holmes: Julia {Smyth} Conner and daughter Pearl Conner [Christmas 1891]; an alleged unborn child of Julia Conner during an "criminal operation" {abortion}[Christmas 1891];a Dr. Russler who had a office in the "Castle" [missing 1892];Miss Kitty Kelly a stenographer for Holmes [missing 1892]; Emily Van Tassel [missing 1892]; Emily Cigrand [missing December 1892]; allegedly during the 1893 Chicago World's Fair a unknown man and a unknown boy were killed in Holmes "hotel"; Minnie Williams & her sister Nannie Williams; [Missing June 1893]; Henry Walker of Greensburg, Indiana. Alleged to have insured his life to Holmes for $20,000. Wrote to friends that he was working for Holmes in Chicago [missing in November of 1893]; Milford Cole of Baltimore Maryland-alleged to have "disappeared" after receiving a telegram from Holmes to come to Chicago [July 1894]. An otherwise unknown victim was a Lucy Burbank-her bankbook was found in Holmes "castle" in 1895 [missing/killed unknown date]. Allegedly in his confession Holmes claimed to have killed two persons in Lake County, Illinois [1890's]-which was confirmed years later when the remains of an unknown man and a unknown woman were found on a farm in 1919-twenty-three years after his execution.

Holmes "hotel" was partially burned by fire in August 1895; it was later used for storage until it was torn down in 1938. The site of the "hotel" is adjoining the Englewood Post Office building at 63rd and Wallace Streets, Chicago, Illinois.

On May 7, 1896, Holmes was hanged at Moyamensing Prison, also known as the Philadelphia County Prison, for four murders and six attempted murders. The murder for which Holmes would be executed for was that of his accomplice Benjamin Petzel in Philadelphia Pennsylvania [Sept 20,1894] ; evidence was also uncovered in the search for Holmes of his involvement in the subsequent murders of three of Petzel's children: Howard Petzel in Irvington, Indiana [October 10, 1894] and Alice and Nellie Petzel in Toronto, Canada [October 25, 1894] . Ironically although Holmes "Murder Castle" was undoubtedly the scene of many of his murders, it was the murder of Petzel in Philadelphia which had the clearest case for murder-as there was only very circumstansial physical evidence of the "Castle" victiums- a piece of human bone possibly from Julia Conner; remains of a child-possibly Pearl Conner; a burned gold watch chain and burned dress buttons-apparently belonging to Minnie Williams; a tuft of human female hair found in a chimney flue. 

Patrick Quinlan who admitted as a workman to building fireproof rooms, trapdoors and walls in Holmes "castle" and who was also the building janitor and caretaker, died March 4, 1914 in Portland Michigan-an apparent suicide. A note left behind said simply "I could not sleep".



