Camacho (wrestler)

Tevita Fifita (born May 7, 1983) is a Tongan-American professional wrestler. He is best known for his time in the WWE where he competed under the ring name, Camacho.

His father also worked for the WWE (then WWF) under the ring name Haku.

Before he became a professional wrestler, Fifita played football at the University of Texas at El Paso. He graduated from there with a degree in Liberal Arts with major in Communications Electronic Media and minor in criminal justice.

He signed a developmental contract with World Wrestling Entertainment on February 10, 2009 and was assigned to their developmental territory Florida Championship Wrestling (FCW) where he competed under the ring name Tonga. Later in March, he joined the Washington's Secret Service stable under the ring name Agent T. where he competed alongside Agent D. and Agent C. After that was over, he changed his ring name to Donny Marlow and teamed with C.J. Parker. On July 21, 2011, Marlow and Parker defeated Calvin Raines and Big E. Langston to win the FCW Florida Tag Team Championship but lost the Tag Team Championship to Brad Maddox and Briley Pierce on November 3.

He debuted on the December 15, 2011 episode of Superstars as the enforcer of Hunico and went under the ring name Camacho. The two teamed together on the April 26 episode of Superstars and defeated The Usos. He made his pay-per-view debut at Over The Limit but was defeated in singles competition against Ryback.

After that, he was sent back down to the developmental territory, the former FCW, which was rebranded into NXT Wrestling. He debuted on NXT in a losing effort against Seth Rollins. He won a match later on the same episode in a six-man tag match when he teamed with Hunico and Michael McGillicutty against Rollins, Bo Dallas and Tyson Kidd. He defeated Kidd in a singles match following a distraction from McGillicutty on the following episode of NXT.

He competed in the pre-show of Money in the Bank when he teamed with Hunico in a losing effort against the WWE Tag Team Champions Kofi Kingston and R-Truth in a non-title match. He made an appearance on the 1,000th episode of Raw with Hunico, Jinder Mahal, Curt Hawkins, Tyler Reks and Drew McIntyre when they tried to ambush Kane in the ring to make a statement but The Undertaker's return resulted in the Brothers of Destruction disposing of all six would-be attackers.

When Hunico got injured, Camacho went back to NXT and attempted to collect a $5,000 bounty that was promised to anybody that could put Big E Langston "on the shelf". Camacho wanted to claim the bounty so he could "get Hunico out of Mexico" but lost to Langston. Camacho reunited with Hunico at the Wrestlemania Axxess live event but he has not been on television since May. He teamed with Hunico to challenge for the NXT Tag Team Championship but were unsuccessful in winning the titles.

On the November 6th episode of WWE Main Event, he once again teamed with Hunico and they made their first televised tag team match since July 2012 against the Usos but lost.

On June 12, 2014, Camacho was released from his WWE contract.





