Czechoslovak Television

Czechoslovak Television (ČST) was a television network. It was the main broadcaster of Czechoslovakia. It closed in 1953 because Czechoslovakia became two new countries, Czech Republic and Slovakia.

In the Czech language, it was called "Československá televize."

In the Slovak language, it was called" Československá televízia "until 1990. In 1990, they changed the Slovak name to "Česko-slovenská televízia".

Czechoslovak Television started on 1st May 1953. It was just one television programme, which was a few hours long.

Czechoslovak Television was heavily censored by the communist government. In 1968, the government allowed Czechoslovak Television to mention the Prague Spring protests for a few days. However in 1969, the government started to censor ČST heavily again.

On May 10, 1970, Czechoslovak Television made a second television channel, "ČST TV2".

On May 9, 1973, Czechoslovak Television started to show television programmes in colour on ČST" "TV2. Two years later, they started colour television programmes on the first channel too.

In 1979, a studio was opened in the Kavci mountains, which became the home of Czechoslovak Television's news department.

In November 1989, Czechoslovak Television renamed the first channel "F1", with the "<nowiki>'F' </nowiki>"meaning the "federal district" of Czechoslovakia. The second channel was replaced by two new channels: ČTV, which was in the Czech language and S1, which was in the Slovak language.

They also created a new third channel in Czech on 14 May 1990, called "OK3", using technology which used to broadcast Soviet television. Another new third channel was created in Slovak and called" TA 3," on 6 June 1991.

During the Velvet Revolution, when protests occurred in Czechoslovakia, the people who worked at Czechoslovak Television helped the protesters to spread their messages.

Czechoslovakia became two new countries, the Czech Republic and Slovakia on the 31st December 1992. This split is known as the "<nowiki>'Velvet Divorce'</nowiki>". Because of it, Czechoslovak Television was no longer needed. In the Czech Republic, a new television network called Czech television took over, and in Slovakia Slovenská televízia was created.



