Lego Star Wars: The Yoda Chronicles

Lego Star Wars: The Yoda Chronicles is a American LEGO animated web and television special film series produced by Lucasfilm Limited, WILFILM and Lego company. The series had two seasons as the first season aired in Cartoon Network and the second season aired in Disney XD. The second season was called Lego Star Wars: The New Yoda Chronicels so Cartoon Network could not claim it as there property.

LEGO Star Wars returns in epic style with THE YODA CHRONICLES, a thrilling, funny and action-packed new LEGO Star Wars story told in three animated TV specials! Set in the “Prequel” Star Wars timeline, THE YODA CHRONICLES stars the one and only Yoda—the Jedi Master who has seen it all, done it all, and taught generations of Jedi Knights—in an all-new adventure. With the help of a fresh class of Padawans, Yoda leads the Jedi in a desperate fight to stop Darth Sidious and his minions from creating a new super-weapon that could crush the Republic and win the war for the forces of Evil.

Lucasfilm Ltd. allowed the LEGO group free reign with developing the storyline. The team worked to make sure everything looked consistent if it would have been made with LEGO bricks, as well as adding humor to the story. The story of season one was set during the Clone Wars and season two was set during the Galactic Empire of from "Star Wars A New Hope" to "Star Wars Empire Strikes Back".

The episodes respectively aired on May 29, 2013, September 4, 2013 and November 27, 2013 on Cartoon Network in the U.S. The first of the 3-part animated series aired on Cartoon Network in India on December 1, 2013 at 4:30 pm and the rest aired on December 8, 2013 and December 15, 2013 at the same time. 

On May 3, Disney released the latest episode on Disney Channel and Disney XD. Since Cartoon Network owned the broadcast rights to "Lego Star Wars: The Yoda Chronicles", the name of the series was altered so it could not claim it as their property. The altered title for season two drops "Lego" and adds "New" to the title - "Star Wars: The New Yoda Chronicles". "Escape from the Jedi Temple" has the Younglings' last appearance.


The first three episodes aired in May 2013 on Cartoon Network. The second season had aired a year later in 2014 but as Disney purchased Lucasfilm the second season came on Disney XD.

Lucasfilm Ltd. released the two first movies "The Phantom Clone" and "Menace of the Sith" on DVD with bonus of several mini movies.

The Mini Movies were released on Lego.com.


 


