Velociraptor

Velociraptor was a predatory dromaeosaur of the Upper Cretaceous, about 75–71 million years ago.

It was a slender, lightly built carnivore. It was about two meters long (nearly seven feet) and 0.62 meters tall at the hip, which is bigger than the size of the common chimpanzee.

"Velociraptor" had one sickle-shaped claw on its foot which measured 6.5 centimeters along its length, and a smaller one on each hand. "Velociraptor" was warm blooded and had feathers.

Fossils from China suggest that the whole clade had similar traits.

Fossils of "Velociraptor" were first found in the Gobi Desert of Mongolia in 1922. In 1988, scientists from China found "Velociraptor" skeletons in northern China.

A famous "Velociraptor", discovered in 1971, was found attacking a "Protoceratops" in a fossil from Mongolia.

In September 2007 researchers found quill knobs on the forearm of a "Velociraptor" found in Mongolia. These bumps on bird wing bones show where feathers anchor, and their presence on "Velociraptor" indicate it too had feathers.

Turner and colleagues interpreted the presence of feathers on "Velociraptor" as evidence that the ancestors of dromaeosaurids could fly, making "Velociraptor" and other large members of this family secondarily flightless. This idea has since been discarded; the unmodified forearms count against it. Therefore, the feathers in the ancestors of "Velociraptor" had another function. The feathers of the flightless "Velociraptor" may have been used for display, for covering their nests while brooding.

The majority view is that dinosaur feathers were primarily adaptations for temperature regulation, and that other uses came later. "Velociraptor" was not able to fly.

Specimens from two species have been found:

In both cases the ecology of the time was dry, with sand dunes with occasional streams.

Films such as "Jurassic Park" and some of "The Land Before Time" films helped make "Velociraptor" popular. However, the raptors in Jurassic Park were ultimately far larger than the real thing. They were also the size of "Deinonychus", a medium-sized member of the same clade. The films also exaggerate its probable intelligence.



