Liv and Maddie

Liv and Maddie, titled Liv and Maddie: Cali Style in its fourth season, is an American teen sitcom. It was created by John D. Beck and Ron Hart. It originally aired on Disney Channel from July 19, 2013 to March 24, 2017. The series stars Dove Cameron in a dual role as identical twin sisters. They have completely different personalities. Liv is a girly girl who was an actress in Hollywood for four years. Maddie is a tomboy who has a talent for sports. Maddie's main sport is basketball. The series is about Liv having to get used to normal family life again after production on her successful television program "Sing It Loud!" ended. It is also about the two sisters being best friends despite their different personalities and interests.

After finishing a four-year stint in Hollywood filming a popular television series called "Sing It Loud!", actress Liv Rooney returns to her birthplace of Stevens Point, Wisconsin to the open arms of her family, despite being offered more roles in other shows and movies. Liv decided to come home because she missed her family and wanted to see them again. She is happily reunited with identical twin sister Maddie. Maddie is her best friend. Liv is very girly and enjoys anytime someone mentions her former career. Maddie is sporty and is the captain of her school's basketball team. The twins have two younger brothers named Joey and Parker. Joey is a typical awkward teen. He is one year younger than the twins. Parker is a clever teen with a mischievous personality and the youngest child of the Rooney family. Their father Pete is the coach for Maddie's basketball team. He eventually achieves his dream of becoming coach for a college team in Beloit, Wisconsin. Their mother Karen is the school psychologist and later vice-principal starting in the second season. In the first three seasons, most events take place at either Ridgewood High, the high school that Liv, Maddie, Joey, and later Parker, due to being a child prodigy, all attend, or the Rooney residence. At the end of the third season, the Rooney house collapses due to a series of tunnels created by Parker and Maddie gets enrolled in a college in Los Angeles, California. This prompts the rest of the Rooneys (except Pete who remains in Wisconsin to continue his coaching job) to move to Malibu, California as well, to take up residence with Karen's younger sister Dena, and her daughter Ruby, where the show's fourth season takes place. A big part of the series are documentary-style cutaways where major characters and the supporting characters talk to the viewers to explain various things and their opinions on the situations in which they are featured in each episode.



In the summer of 2012, Oops Doughnuts Productions had shopped the script of a project called "Bits and Pieces". It was about a blended family similar to shows like "The Brady Bunch" and "Step by Step". The series followed Jodie Sullenger (Kali Rocha), mother of Alanna (Dove Cameron) and Sticky (Joey Bragg). She married Pete Fickman (Benjamin King), father of Crystal (Cozi Zuehlsdorff) and Brody (Tenzing Norgay Trainor), with all six adjusting to life under the same roof. Eventually, Disney chose to change the concept of "Bits and Pieces" into one about a pair of twins. Now titled "Liv and Maddie", the series began production in April 2013.

The series was produced under a joint venture between Beck & Hart Productions, Oops Doughnuts Productions, and It's a Laugh Productions. The show's co-creators John D. Beck and Ron Hart are a production-writing team whose credits include "According to Jim", "Hey Arnold!", and "Shake It Up!". They also served as executive producers alongside Andy Fickman, who was the only director who participated in all four seasons of the series. He directed 20 of the 21 episodes of the first season, as well as four of the second season, two of the third season, and four of the fourth season.

On January 13, 2014, Disney Channel renewed "Liv and Maddie" for a 13-episode second season slated to premiere in fall 2014. The second season was later expanded to 24 episodes. The first season ended on July 27, 2014. The second season premiered on September 21, 2014. On April 3, 2015, the series was renewed for a third season by Disney Channel. The second season ended on August 23, 2015. The third season premiered on September 13, 2015. On December 21, 2015, actress Dove Cameron stated that Disney Channel was picking up "Liv and Maddie" for a fourth season. On June 19, 2016, series creator Ron Hart announced on Twitter that the fourth season would premiere in fall 2016. On July 1, 2016, Dove Cameron stated that they had filmed the show's final episode. On August 19, 2016, it was announced by the show's creators, John D. Beck and Ron Hart, that the last season would be called "Liv and Maddie: Cali Style". They also stated that the fourth and last season would premiere on September 23, 2016.

Casting took place during the spring of 2012; however, only a pilot episode was produced. Instead of hiring a new cast, production chose to keep those whom they had already hired and film a completely new pilot. The story now focused on Dove Cameron playing dual roles with the same parents and brothers. Lead billing for Cozi Zuehlsdorff was later dropped to guest star. The family name of "Rooney" was picked because of Sullenger's enjoyment of the Pittsburgh Steelers, a team owned by the Rooney family.

<onlyinclude> </onlyinclude>

"Liv and Maddie" airs on Disney Channel in the United States and Family Channel in Canada. The first episode aired as a preview on July 19, 2013. The first promo for the series was seen on June 28, 2013. The series officially premiered in the United States on September 15, 2013, and in Canada on September 20, 2013. The series stopped airing in Canada on Family Channel on September 1, 2015, and started airing on Disney Channel on September 5, 2015. La Chaîne Disney in French Canada premiered the episode "Home Run-a-Rooney" on March 24, 2016, 17 days before the US and Canada airing on April 10, 2016. In the UK and Ireland, the series aired a preview on October 7, 2013. It later premiered on November 8, 2013. In Australia and New Zealand, the series premiered on October 11, 2013. The second season premiered on January 8, 2015. The third season premiered on December 2, 2015. The series premiered in Southeast Asia on January 10, 2014. In the Balkans, Greece, the Middle East and Africa, the series premiered on March 8, 2014. The second season premiered on February 7, 2015.



