Alpha and Omega 3: The Great Wolf Games

Alpha and Omega 3: The Great Wolf Games is a 2014 American computer-animated comedy/adventure movie. It is the third installment in the "Alpha and Omega" franchise. Like the second one, this movie is directed by Richard Rich and Perry Andelin Blake and written by Tom Kane. "Alpha and Omega 3" follows the story of The Great Wolf Games, a contest where puppies from different packs compete. Runt, Stinky and Claudette also join in, even though their pack "took a pass on the games", with Humphrey as their coach.

The movie is a sequel to "Alpha and Omega" and "". It came out on iTunes on March 4, 2014 and it's available for download. It was released on March 25, 2014 as a Walmart Exclusive. Just like the second movie, "Alpha and Omega 3" received mixed reviews by critics (having 44% in Rotten Tomatoes and a 42 out of 100 in Metacritic) and mostly positive reviews by fans (with audience rating of 77%). However, it wasn't as successful as "Alpha and Omega 2".

Kate, Humphrey, and the puppies are back in Jasper. Kate has to leave on hunting trip with the others. Humphrey has to take care of the puppies. Runt, Stinky and Claudette hear about The Great Wolf Games from another puppy from the Northern Pack named Fleet. He has a crush on Claudette and tells them that the Western Pack won't be in the games. Claudette insists on forming their own team with Brent a grizzly bear cub, and Agnes a porcupine. Humphrey becomes their coach.

Director Richard Rich said there would be a third and fourth movies in the franchise. He directs "Alpha and Omega 3". Tom Kane wrote the script. He was also the uncredited co-director. "Alpha and Omega 3" came out on iTunes in March 4, 2014. It came out on March 25, 2014 as a Walmart Exclusive.


Once again, "Alpha and Omega 3: The Great Wolf Games" received mixed reviews from critics. It had a 44% rating in Rotten Tomatoes and a 42 out of 100 in Metacritic. The movie's consensus in Rotten Tomatoes is: "Alpha and Omega 3: The Great Wolf Games" does have improved animation, lovable characters and it'll definitely entertain kids and die hard fans of the franchise, but it seems to suffer from a lazy story and a thinly-written script". Critics noted the animation's improvement, nice humor, likable characters and improved ending, but criticized the movie's story and the absence of the rest of the main characters. However, fans of the franchise had mostly positive reactions for the movie. Though they expressed disappointment on the story and for the lack of the original characters, they praised the movie on everything else. "Alpha and Omega 3" had a fresh audience rating of 77% on the Rotten Tomatoes Community.

"" came out on iTunes on September 23, 2014. It was released on DVD, Digital HD and Pay-Per-View on October 7.


