J. P. Parisé

Jean-Paul Joseph-Louis Parisé (December 11, 1941 – January 7, 2015) was a Canadian ice hockey coach and left winger. He played 17 years in the National Hockey League (NHL). He played for the Boston Bruins, Minnesota North Stars, Toronto Maple Leafs, New York Islanders, and the Cleveland Barons. His son Zach currently plays for the Minnesota Wild.

Before playing in the NHL, Parisé played 38 games with the Niagara Falls Flyers of the Ontario Hockey Association (OHA), 65 games with the Kingston Frontenacs of the Eastern Professional Hockey League (EPHL), and two seasons with the Minneapolis Bruins of the Central Professional Hockey League (CPHL).

Parisé made his NHL debut in the 1965–66 NHL season with the Boston Bruins. He would only play 3 games with them that season and 18 games the next.

When the 1967–68 NHL season started, there was an expansion and expansion draft. Parisé was drafted by the Oakland Seals on June 6, 1967. On October 12, the Seals traded him along with Bryan Hextall Jr. to the Toronto Maple Leafs in exchange for Gerry Ehman. The Maple Leafs would assign Parisé to the Rochester Americans of the American Hockey League (AHL). He ended up playing 30 games with the Americans and 1 games for the Maple Leafs. 

On December 23, the Maple Leafs traded him along with Milan Marcetta to the Minnesota North Stars in exchange for Murray Hall, Ted Taylor, Len Lunde, Don Johns, Duke Harris, and the loan of Carl Wetzel. He had his most success during his time with the North Stars. Parisé would play on a line with Jude Drouin and Bill Goldsworthy. He would play six seasons and parts of two others with the North Stars. He played in two NHL All-Star Games, and had his best professional season in the 1972–73 season, scoring a career high 27 goals and 75 points.

On January 5, 1975, the North Stars decided to trade the aging Parisé to the New York Islanders in exchange for Doug Rombough and Ernie Hicke. While he was with the Islanders, he was able to help them reach their first playoff berth that season and was also able to help them reach the Stanley Cup semifinals, where they were defeated in a seven game series by the eventual Stanley Cup champions Philadelphia Flyers.

On January 10, 1978, the Islanders traded him along with Jean Potvin to the Cleveland Barons in exchange for Wayne Merrick, Darcy Regier, and Cleveland's fourth round choice (the draft choice was cancelled by the Cleveland-Minnesota merger) in 1978 Amateur Draft. After the Barons merged with the North Stars, Parisé became a North Star again. He was named the team's captain in the 1978–79 season. It would end up being his last season and he retired from playing professional ice hockey after it was over.

On January 7, 2015, Parisé died from lung cancer at his home in Prior Lake, Minnesota.



