Kingdom Hearts II

Kingdom Hearts II is a video game from the "Kingdom Hearts" series for the PlayStation 2. It has the characters of the Final Fantasy series and Walt Disney characters; for example Donald Duck, Goofy and Mickey Mouse. "Kingdom Hearts II" starts one year after the end of and continues the story from "Kingdom Hearts" and "Chain of Memories", for PlayStation 2 and Game Boy Advance. It was released in Japan on December 22, 2005, in North America on March 28, 2006, and in Europe on September 29, 2006.

In "Kingdom Hearts II", the player controls a 15-year-old boy named Sora. Sora goes through different worlds (based around many different Disney movies) fighting different enemies like Heartless and Nobodies. Occasionally, there will be enemies you have to defeat that are based on the world you are in, such as the cursed pirates in Pirates of the Caribbean.

The player starts the game controlling Roxas, a 15-year-old boy living in a town called Twilight Town. He is on summer vacation with his three best friends, Hayner, Pence, and Olette. As a week goes by, strange things begin to happen. A man named Axel, a member of Organization XIII who was in "Chain of Memories", shows up and is surprised and upset that Roxas does not remember him. They fight, and Roxas discovers that he can use a Keyblade. Roxas also meets Naminé and a man named DiZ who was in Riku's side of "Chain of Memories". Naminé tells Roxas she has been changing his memories so he can become "whole" again. Axel tells Roxas they used to be friends and that he must either take Roxas back to the Organization or destroy him. They battle, and Axel disappears. Roxas then finds Sora, and disappears himself.

After Roxas disappears, Sora wakes up and becomes the new player character. Donald and Goofy also wake up, and the three of them continue their mission to find Riku. As they search for him, they meet the rest of the members of Organization XIII and learn that they are beings called Nobodies. When a Heartless steals someone's heart, that person also becomes a Heartless, but if their heart is strong, their body becomes a Nobody. Nobodies have no emotions, but want to have hearts again. Xemnas, the leader of Organization XIII, is trying to summon Kingdom Hearts, which he claims will enable the Nobodies to get their hearts back. To summon Kingdom Hearts, Heartless must be killed with a Keyblade, which will release the hearts they hold and let them return to Kingdom Hearts. This is the reason the Organization wanted Sora to join them.

It is later revealed that Roxas is Sora's Nobody, and was a member of Organization XIII. Roxas was created when Sora briefly lost his heart in "Kingdom Hearts". Naminé is then revealed to be Kairi's Nobody, who was created when Kairi lost her heart at the beginning of "Kingdom Hearts". Xemnas is the Nobody of a man called Xehanort, who no longer exists. Ansem, the main enemy from the first game, was Xehanort's Heartless.

Near the end of the game, Sora, Kairi and Riku reunite and destroy Xemnas. With all members of Organization XIII destroyed and the worlds apparently safe, Sora, Riku and Kairi go home to Destiny Islands.

"Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix +" is a reissue of the game that was released only in Japan on March 29, 2007. It has more content than "Kingdom Hearts II", including new areas, new battles, and a new secret ending. It is also for the PlayStation 2.



