Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U

Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U are two fighting video games for the Nintendo 3DS and Wii U game consoles. They were developed by Sora Ltd. and Namco Bandai Games and published by Nintendo. They act as the fourth game in the "Super Smash Bros." series. The 3DS game was released on September 13, 2014. The Wii U game was released on November 21, 2014.

Like past games in the series, "Super Smash Bros." involves characters from Nintendo series fighting against each other, with the object of knocking opponents off of the stage in some way. Characters from past "Super Smash Bros." games that are in these games include Mario, Luigi, Bowser, Princess Peach, Yoshi, Link, Princess Zelda, Sheik, , Fox McCloud, Kirby, King Dedede, Pikachu, Lucario, Charizard, Donkey Kong, Diddy Kong, Samus Aran, Zero Suit Samus, Marth, Ike, Pit, Sonic the Hedgehog, and Olimar. There are six new characters: Villager from the "Animal Crossing" series, Mega Man from the "Mega Man" series, the "Wii Fit" Trainer, Rosalina from the "Mario" series., Little Mac from the "Punch-Out!!" series, Greninja from the "Pokémon" series, the Mii, Palutena from the "Kid Icarus" series, and Pac-Man from the "Pac-Man" series. There are also many hidden characters to be unlocked dubbed "Secret Characters" by the official Super Smash Bros. Website.

The Wii U version has high-definition graphics. The Nintendo 3DS version has cel-shaded (computer graphics made to look like they were drawn by hand) graphics. Both versions have the same number of characters, but have stages that are only in either version. The Nintendo 3DS version has more stages based on Nintendo's handheld video games. The Wii U version has more stages based on their console video games. For the first time in the series, players can change the movesets of characters. They can play with characters they have changed the movesets of in single-player and with friends.

There are also downloadable characters that were released. Mewtwo, who had last appeared in "Melee", was released on April 28, 2015 and was made available on April 15, 2015 for members of Club Nintendo who had purchased and registered both 3DS and Wii U versions of the game before March 31, 2015. Lucas from "Mother 3", who had last appeared in "Brawl", and Roy from "", who last appeared in "Melee", made their returns and were released on June 14, 2015. Ryu from the "Street Fighter" series was also announced as a new character and was released alongside Lucas and Roy. On November 12, 2015, it was announced that Cloud Strife from "Final Fantasy VII" would be joining as a newcomer. 

On April 1, 2015, a ballot was launched on the official "Smash Bros" website, which allowed players to nominate video game characters to be added as playable characters. The ballot's deadline was on October 3, 2015. On December 15, 2015, a special "Smash Bros." broadcast was shown. Cloud Strife was released after the broadcast. Corrin from "Fire Emblem Fates" and Bayonetta from the series of the same name were announced as the last downloadable characters. They were released on February 3, 2016. Bayonetta was chosen as the winner of the "Smash Bros." ballot. She ranked first in Europe and was among the top five in North America among "realizable" characters.



