First Battle of Bull Run

The First Battle of Bull Run was the first large battle of the American Civil War. It was fought on July 21, 1861. The battle took place near a stream called Bull Run. The battle actually has two names: the First Battle of Bull Run and First Battle of Manassas.

Union general Irvin McDowell was put in command of the Union army in northeastern Virginia. Many people in the North wanted him to attack to Confederate capital city of Richmond, Virginia. McDowell didn't think his soldiers were ready to fight but Union president Abraham Lincoln wanted him to march south into Virginia anyway.

The Confederates had an army nearby, which was commanded by P.G.T. Beauregard. After McDowell's army started marching towards Beauregard's army, Joseph Johnston came to Manassas Junction with his army from the Shenandoah Valley. Johnston was in command of the entire Confederate army and Beauregard was his second-in-command.

The battle started early in the morning on July 21st. McDowell started marching part of his army around the left end of the Confederate army. The two armies started shooting at each other about 6 a.m. near Matthews Hill. The Confederates did not expect the Union army to attack but they moved brigades to their left flank.

McDowell made the Confederates leave Matthews Hill about 11 a.m. The Confederates retreated back to another hill called Henry House Hill. On the hill was Thomas J. Jackson's brigade. Another Confederate general was trying to regroup his men. He said, "There stands Jackson standing like a stonewall". After the battle Jackson would be called "Stonewall".

The Union army made many attacks on the Confederate line on Henry House Hill. All of the attacks failed. In the afternoon the Confederates made an attack of their own. This drove the Union army back towards Washington, D.C. The Confederates were too tired to march after the Union army.

The Union army had 2,896 casualties. McDowell was blamed for the Union defeat. He was replaced by George B. McClellan. The Confederates had 1,982 casualties. Even though Johnston was in charge of the Confederate army, Beauregard became famous after the battle.




