Viraj Dobriyal

Viraj Dobriyal is a character from the Indian television series Dil Se Di Dua... Saubhagyavati Bhava?. The character was portrayed by actor Karanvir Bohra. 

Viraj Dobriyal is one of the most popular bad guy characters on Indian television. He is a psychologically disabled man who has mood swings. On one side, Viraj gets angry and after some span of time, he gets normal. He tortures and batters his wife Jhanvi often even on a small mistake. He claims to be "Mr.Perfect". Due to Viraj's irrational and excessive abusive behavior, Jhanvi suffers a miscarriage and runs away from his house and adopts a new personality "Sia". Viraj finds that she is in Delhi, so he hatches the plan to take her away. Even things get worsen up when Viraj takes Raghav's family as hostages and tried to kill Raghav's nephew Krish. But in turn of events, Raghav beats Viraj and in turn Viraj attacks Sia in result of being arrested. After Sia recovers, Viraj wants revenge. Now Viraj gets arrested and Sia gets engaged with Raghav. A vengeful Viraj, fakes his own death and escapes. Viraj was tortured by a criminal, Rana and gave shocks to him which turns Viraj's mind into a 7-year old kid. Raghav now suspects if it its Viraj's new trick but Viraj was in trouble. Raghav, for sake of humanity helps him though Viraj is coldblooded person. Rana has past of killing Raghav's family and Viraj knows it (The reason Rana disabled his mind). No sooner Rana tries to suffocate Viraj but saved by Raghav. During treatment in hospital Viraj regains his memory and kills the ward boy (for not doing his duty). Viraj, now a change of heart wants to forget Sia, but during marriage of Sia, a group of goons attacks Raghav and accidentally kills him. Sia blames Viraj but he clearly denies. Now he brings Sia and tries to brainwash her memories of Raghav but she claims that she loved Raghav and not Viraj. A furious Viraj then kills Sia. After her death, Sia heart gets transpanted in Ananya's body. Now Viraj wants Sia's heart from Anu's body. But after a furious chases, Viraj gets jailed and sentenced to 14 years in prison. Viraj in last act of morality ask forgiveness to Sia and confesses his crime to the world through news channel.



