Canadian Open

The Canadian Open is a tennis tournament that takes place on outdoor hard courts. It is held in Montreal and Toronto, usually at the start of August. Before 2011, it was held in two different weeks during July and August.

The tournament adjusts for the men and women's side each year, it shifts from being held in Montreal and Toronto, in odd-numbered years the men's side of the draw is held in Montreal and the women's are held in Toronto, and in even years they switch to the other site.

The men's tournament started in 1881, and was first held at the Toronto Lawn Tennis Club, and the women's side of the tournament started later in 1892. There are only two leading tournaments that started before the Canadian Open began are, Wimbledon and the US Open.

Before 1968 the tournament was known as the Canadian National Championships, since the start of the open era, the tournament has had many sponsors in the 1970s it was held under the Rothmans International tobacco brand, Player's Limited was the main sponsor in the 1980s, and the sponsor changed again in 1997 to cigarette company Du Maurier. Since federal measures have come in to place to restrict tobacco advertising, Rogers a media company has become the head sponsor.
A male Canadian tennis player has not won the men's singles tournament since 1958. However, in 2013 Milos Raonic was the first Canadian player to reach the final since the start of the open era, after he beat fellow Canadian Vasek Pospisil in the Semifinals.

Faye Urban was the last woman to reach the women's singles final, after her win in 1969. The Canadian players have had greater fortunes in the men's doubles tournament with Daniel Nestor and Sébastien Lareau both becoming champions. The women's doubles tournament has not been won by a Canadian female tennis player since 1969 also when Vicki Berner and Faye Urban won against another Canadian paring of Jane O'Hara and Vivienne Strong in a repeat of the 1968 final. After that, Helen Kelesi is the only Canadian player who reached the doubles final, in 1990.



