Ajdovščina

Ajdovščina (, ) is a small Slovenian town that is the administrative centre of the Municipality of Ajdovščina (). It is an economic and cultural centre of the Vipava Valley (), southwestern Slovenia, near the border with Italy.

The municipality of Ajdovščina was established on 10 March 1994. Its administrative centre is the town of Ajdovščina.

The municipality has an area , and a population, in 2012, of 19,016: 9,600 men and 9,416 women. Its population density is of inhabitants/km.

The highest point in the municipality is the "Veliki Golak" mountain () in Predmeja near the border with the municipality of Nova Gorica; it is high. The lowest point is on the Vipava river to the south of the village of Batuje – lying at above sea level. The average altitude at the town of Ajdovščina is .

The main river in the municipality or that flows through it is the Vipava. The "Hubelj" river, a right tributary of the Vipava, is a short stream that divides the town of Ajdovščina in two large parts: Ajdovščina itself and Šturje.

The municipality of Ajdovščina is surrounded by the following municipalities: Idrija to the north and east, Postojna to the southeast, Vipava to the south, Komen to the southwest and Nova Gorica to the west.

Mild winters and hot summers are typical of the Vipava Valley. Mean July temperature, measured in Ajdovščina, is and mean winter temperature is . The average annual rainfall in the Vipava Valley is . The Bora wind is a characteristic wind of the valley which is more common during winter; it is a cold and strong wind.

There are 45 settlements () in the municipality; the main is Ajdovščina, which is the administrative centre of the municipality.

The other 44 settlements are Batuje, Bela, Brje, Budanje, Cesta, Col, Črniče, Dobravlje, Dolenje, Dolga Poljana, Gaberje, Gojače, Gozd, Grivče, Kamnje, Kovk, Kožmani, Križna gora, Lokavec, Male Žablje, Malo Polje, Malovše, Otlica, Plače, Planina, Podkraj, Potoče, Predmeja, Ravne, Selo, Skrilje, Stomaž, Šmarje, Tevče, Ustje, Velike Žablje, Vipavski Križ, Višnje, Vodice, Vrtovče, Vrtovin, Zavino, Žagolič, Žapuže.

The municipality of Ajdovščina is twinned with:





