The S.O.S. Band

The S.O.S. Band (sometimes written SOS Band; abbreviation for Sounds Of Success) is an American R&B and electro-funk group who gained fame in the 1980s. They are best known for the songs "Take Your Time (Do It Right)," "Just Be Good to Me," "Tell Me If You Still Care," and "The Finest."

The band was founded in Atlanta, Georgia in 1977. The original group members included Willie "Sonny" Killebrew (saxophone), Billy Ellis (flute), Jason "T.C." Bryant (keyboards), Bruno Speight (guitar), John Simpson (bass), James Earl Jones III (drums), and Mary Davis (lead vocals, keyboards). It was originally known as Santa Monica, but later changed its name to The S.O.S. Band- an acronym for Sounds of Success. After listening to its demo and being impressed with their sound, Tabu Records founder Clarence Avant signed the group to its first recording contract.

In 1980, the group released its first hit single, "Take Your Time (Do It Right)", which was certified platinum and sold over 2 million copies. Its debut album, "S.O.S.", went gold and sold over 800,000 copies. Trumpeter, vocalist, and percussionist Abdul Ra'oof joined the band while it was on a world tour.

In 1983, the band joined forces with then-new production team of Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis, who went on to craft a string of R&B hits for the group, which included "Just Be Good to Me," "High Hopes," "Tell Me If You Still Care," "Borrowed Love," "No One's Gonna Love You," "Just the Way You Like It," and "The Finest."

Lead vocalist Mary Davis left the group in 1987 to pursue a solo career, and was replaced by Chandra Currelley beginning with the band's 1989 "Diamonds in the Raw" album. They recorded another album with Currelley - 1991's "One of Many Nights", which featured a few songs with a guest appearance from a then-unknown Kurupt.

More recently, Currelley has been active as an actress and vocalist in Tyler Perry plays and films. When Davis’s solo career was not as successful as she hoped, she reunited with the band in 1994. Since then, Davis spilt from the remaining members of The S.O.S. Band, with Davis and Speight both touring using the band's name with their versions of the current lineup.

In 2013, The S.O.S. Band's entire Tabu Records catalog was reissued, as Tabu licensed their brand and trademark to British-based record label Demon Music Group.

"All albums and singles listed below were issued on Tabu Records."


