Jeff Smith

Jeffrey L. "Jeff" Smith (January 22, 1939 – July 7, 2004) was an American chef. He wrote several best-selling cookbooks. Smith was the host of "The Frugal Gourmet", a long running American cooking show. He was called "the most visible gourmet" of the 1980s by Time Magazine.

Smith was born in Seattle, Washington on January 22, 1939. He attended the University of Puget Sound in 1962. In 1965, Smith graduated from Drew University. He was ordained a minister in the United Methodist church. Smith returned to the University of Puget Sound as the chaplain of Aldergate Methodist Church in 1966. In 1972, he left the university to open his own restaurant called the Chaplain's Pantry. In 1973, Smith began his first cooking show, "Cooking Fish Creatively", on a local Tacoma, Washington PBS station, KTPS-TV. After several seasons it was renamed "The Frugal Gourmet". The name was suggested by his wife, Patty. Known himself as "The Frugal Gourmet", Smith's nickname quickly became "The Frug". Smith always appeared wearing his "trademark" blue and white striped apron. His first cookbook, "Recipes from The Frugal Gourmet", was published in 1977. The theme music for "The Frugal Gourmet" was the Bourree movement from "Water Music" by George Frideric Handel.

In 1981, Smith had heart valve surgery. He was forced to sell the Chaplain's Pantry to pay the huge medical costs. In 1983, he was interviewed on the Phil Donahue show promoting his paperback cookbook. After that, Smith sold 45,000 copies at $4.75 each. The profits allowed him to get out of debt. In 1983, PBS station WTTW in Chicago picked up his show and aired it nationally. The show aired for over 200 episode. Smith ended every episode of "The Frugal Gourmet" by saying, "Until I see you again, this is the Frugal Gourmet. I bid you peace, bye-bye". Smith was also quoted as saying "frugal does not mean cheap." He explained, "A frugal gourmet is a thrifty person who enjoys good food."

Smith appeared in television commercials for Columbia Crest Wines. In 1995, Smith hosted "The Frugal Gourmet Keeps the Feast" for the Odyssey Television Network. That same year, he acted in the movie "Grumpier Old Men".

In 1997, seven men filed lawsuits against him for alleged sexual abuse. Six of the men said they were abused when they were younger and worked at the Chaplain's Pantry. The case never went to court. Smith said the abuse never happened. The "Frugal Gourmet" empire ended with the scandal.

Smith married his wife Patricia in 1966. They had two sons, Channing and Jason. Patricia is credited by originating the nickname "Frugal Gourmet".

Smith died in his sleep on July 7, 2004 at the age of 65. He had suffered from heart disease for a long time. Smith was survived by his wife Patricia, and sons Channing and Jason, as well as daughters-in-law Yuki and Lisa.





