Sherman Brothers

The Sherman Brothers were an American songwriting duo that wrote music for musical movies. The duo was made up of Robert B. Sherman (December 19, 1925 – March 6, 2012) and Richard M. Sherman (born June 12, 1928).

The Sherman Brothers wrote more motion-picture musical song scores than any other songwriting team in film history. Film scores of the Sherman Brothers include "Mary Poppins", "Chitty Chitty Bang Bang", "The Jungle Book", "Charlotte's Web" and "The Aristocats".

Sons of Russian Jewish immigrants, Robert and Richard Sherman began writing songs together in 1951 on a challenge from their father, Tin Pan Alley songwriter Al Sherman. The brothers wrote together and with different songwriting partners throughout the rest of the decade.

In 1958 Robert founded the music publishing company Music World Corporation. It later enjoyed a relationship with Disney's BMI-affiliated publishing arm, Wonderland Music Company. That same year, the Sherman Brothers had their first top-ten hit with "Tall Paul," sung by Mouseketeer Judy Harriet on the Surf Records label. It was also sung by Mouseketeer Annette Funicello. The success of this song got the attention of Walt Disney. He then hired the Sherman Brothers as Staff Songwriters for Walt Disney Studios. The first song they wrote on personal assignment by Walt Disney was "Strummin' Song" in 1961. It was used in the Annette Funicello made-for-television movie called "The Horsemasters".

While at Disney, the Sherman Brothers wrote more motion-picture musical scores than any other songwriters in the history of film. They also wrote what is perhaps their best-known song, "it's a small world (after all)" for the 1964 New York World's Fair. Since then, some have claimed that this has become the most translated and performed song on Earth, although this is largely due to the fact that it is played at Disney's theme park "it's a small world" attractions of the same name.

In 1965 the Sherman Brothers won two Academy Awards for "Mary Poppins", which includes the songs "Feed The Birds," "Supercalifragilisticexpialidocious," and the Oscar-winning "Chim Chim Cher-ee." Since "Mary Poppins"' first was shown, the Shermans have earned nine Academy Award nominations, two Grammy Awards, four Grammy Award nominations, and 23 gold- and platinum-certified albums.

Robert and Richard Sherman worked directly for Walt Disney, completing the scores for the live-action musical films "The Happiest Millionaire" and "The One and Only, Genuine, Original Family Band" until Disney's death in 1966. Since leaving the company, the brothers have worked freelance as songwriters on scores of motion pictures, television shows, theme-park exhibits, and stage musicals.

Their first non-Disney assignment came with Albert R. Broccoli's motion picture production "Chitty Chitty Bang Bang" for United Artists in 1968. It got the brothers their third Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song for its particularly memorable titular song.

In 1970, the Shermans returned to Disney for a brief stint where they completed work on "The Aristocats" and "Bedknobs and Broomsticks". The latter film got the brothers their fourth and fifth Oscar nominations. 1972 saw the release of "Snoopy Come Home", for which the brothers received a Grammy nomination.

In 1973 the Sherman Brothers also made history by becoming the only Americans ever to win First Prize at the Moscow Film Festival for "Tom Sawyer", for which they also authored the screenplay.

In 1976 “The Slipper and the Rose” was picked to be the Royal Command Performance of the year. The performance was attended by Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother. A modern musical version of the classic Cinderella story, "Slipper", also featured songs, score, and screenplay by the Sherman Brothers. Two further Academy Award nominations were gotten by the brothers for the film. That same year the Sherman Brothers got their star on the Hollywood "Walk of Fame" directly across from Grauman's Chinese Theater.

The Sherman Brothers' numerous other Disney and non-Disney top box office film credits include "The Jungle Book" (1967), "The Aristocats" (1970), "The Parent Trap" (1961), "The Parent Trap" (1998), "Charlotte's Web" (1973), "Huckleberry Finn" (1974),"The Many Adventures of Winnie the Pooh" (1977), "Snoopy, Come Home" (1972), "Bedknobs and Broomsticks" (1971), and "" (1989).

Outside the motion-picture realm, their Tony Award-nominated smash hit "Over Here!" (1974) was the biggest-grossing original Broadway musical of that year. The Sherman Brothers have also written numerous top selling songs including "You're Sixteen," which reached Billboard's Hot 100 top 10 twice: first with Johnny Burnette in 1960 and then at #1 with Ringo Starr more than thirteen years later. Other top-ten hits include "Pineapple Princess," "Let's Get Together," and more.

In 2000 the Sherman Brothers wrote the song score for the Disney film "The Tigger Movie". This film marked the brothers' first major motion picture for the Disney company in over 28 years.

In 2003, four Sherman Brothers' musicals ranked in the Top 10 Favorite Children's Films of All Time in a British nationwide poll reported by the BBC. Most notably, "Chitty Chitty Bang Bang" 1968 topped the list at #1.

In later years, with Robert's move to London, the brothers wrote many new songs for the stage musical presentations of "Chitty Chitty Bang Bang" and "Mary Poppins", produced by Disney and Cameron Mackintosh.

For their contributions to the motion picture industry, the Sherman brothers have a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6918 Hollywood Blvd. They were inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame on June 9, 2005. On November 16, 2006, "Mary Poppins" premiered at the New Amsterdam Theatre on Broadway.

On November 17, 2008 the Sherman Brothers got the National Medal of Arts which is the highest honor given to artists by the United States Government. The award was presented by United States President George W. Bush in an East Room ceremony at The White House.

On May 22, 2009, "The Boys: the Sherman Brothers’ Story", a movie about the pair, was shown in theatres. The film was directed and produced by their sons, Gregory V. Sherman and Jeff Sherman. It was put out by Walt Disney Pictures.

In October 2009, Disney released a 59 track, two CD compendium of their work for the studio spanning forty-two years. The CD is titled "The Sherman Brothers Songbook".

On March 11, 2010 the Sherman Brothers were presented with a Window on Mainstreet Disneyland in Anaheim, California, in honor of their contribution to Disney theme parks. On May 17, 2010, the Sherman Brothers received the "Career Achievement Award" at The Theatre Museum's 2010 Awards Gala in New York City.








From 2002, Robert Sherman lived in London, England. He moved from Beverly Hills, while Richard Sherman remained in California. Robert Sherman died in London on March 6, 2012.
























