Gute Zeiten, schlechte Zeiten

Gute Zeiten, schlechte Zeiten (English: "Good Times, Bad Times") is a German soap opera. It started in 1992 on RTL. It is the most successful German television series.

"Gute Zeiten, schlechte Zeiten" started on 11 May 1992. It is broadcast from Monday to Friday on RTL. It is repeated the following day at 8:30 a.m.

The first episode was broadcast at VOX on October 1995. After the 2500 episode it was taken out of the program VOX on February 2005.

Many main roles of the series led several cafés and restaurants in the beginning of the series, that's are the pubs "Allistairs", "Siggis Bar" and "Daniels Bar", the bar "Bluebird", the restaurant "Fasan" and the café "Mocca" for example. It were to seen many business in the area of the media industry, that's are the advertising agency "Löpelmann", "Sisters" and the newspaper editorial offices of the local newspaper "City-Lights" and "Morgenecho". In "Viktoria-Luise-Gymnasium" teach Elisabeth Meinhart and Clemens Richter. There played many young main roles. It gave many shops: "Holms Tante Emma Laden", "Charlies Laden", "Kais Corner" and several boutiques. Other important localities were a motorcycle workshop, who have led Peter Becker and Heiko Richter. The GP surgeries have led Dr. Ulrich and then Dr. Gundlach. Now, Jo Gerner leads a law firm. The hostel "Traumfabrik" was destroyed in 2010. Now it is to see the lifestyle magazine "Metropolitan Trends" of Katrin Flemming, the club "Mauerwerk", the café "Vereinsheim", Tayfuns food shops "Spätkauf" and "Badak Bio", the cosmetics business of Emily Höfer, the Jeremiah hospital.

The North American State Canada was a major role at GZSZ, because many characters went to this state. Paula Rapf went to Canada and began a job in a farm. Afterwards it came her best friend Tim Böcking with his son Felix to this State and then came Tim's girlfriend Caroline Neustädter with her son Benjamin to Tim. In 2010, Tim's father Clemens Richter and his wife Elisabeth Meinhart moved to Canada. John Bachmann visits the country regularly.



