Luka Magnotta

Luka Rocco Magnotta (born Eric Clinton Kirk Newman; July 24, 1982) is a Canadian pornographic actor and model. He was convicted of murdering and dismembering his male lover Lin Jun, a Chinese international student, then mailing his severed limbs to different political parties and elementary schools.

Magnotta has had schizophrenia since 2000. He was convicted of fraud in Toronto in 2005 and sentenced to community service and probation.

After an 11-minute video titled "1 Lunatic 1 Ice Pick" was uploaded to Bestgore.com which allegedly showed the murder was posted online, Magnotta fled Canada and was the subject of a Interpol Red Notice which lead to an international manhunt. Magnotta was arrested after he was found in an Internet café in Berlin while he was reading news about himself. He tried to give police fake names before he admitted who he was. He was handed over to Canadian authorities in Berlin on June 18, 2012 and was flown back to Canada on a Royal Canadian Air Force CC-150 Polaris. Magnotta was placed into solitary confinement at the Rivière-des-Prairies detention centre.

At 11 AM on May 29, 2012, a package which contained a left foot was delivered to the headquarters of the Conservative Party of Canada. Another package which contained a left hand was addressed to the Liberal Party but was intercepted in a Canada Post processing facility. A janitor found a decomposing torso in a suitcase. It was left in a garbage pile in the alley behind an apartment building in the Snowdon area of Montreal. On June 5, 2012, a package which contained a right foot was delivered to St. George's School and another package which contained a right hand to False Creek Elementary School in Vancouver.

On June 6, 2012, Lin Jun's family arrived at Trudeau Airport in Montreal. A candlelight vigil was then held in Montreal.

The body parts were later matched to Lin Jun by DNA samples from his family. After police received an anonymous tip, they recovered Lin Jun's head which was lying at the edge of a small lake in Montreal's Angrignon Park.

On July 11, Lin's body was cremated and his ashes were buried in the Notre-Dame-des-Neiges cemetery in Montreal.

Canadian media named Magnotta the Canadian Newsmaker of the Year which caused controversy.

After committal for trial, the preliminary inquiry judge set a tentative trial for September 8, 2014 on April 29, 2013. On 29 September 2014 in court in Quebec, Magnotta admitted killing Jun Lin. He pleaded not guilty to murder due to his schizophrenia. He has been diagnosed with borderline personality disorder and histrionic personality disorder.

After a twelve-week trial, the jury received their final instructions from the trial judge on December 15, 2014. On their eighth day of the jury's deliberation, they returned a verdict of guilty on all charges. Magnotta is serving a life sentence and he will be eligible for parole in 25 years. Magnotta was also sentenced to 19 years for other charges.

Magnotta was previously sought by animal rights groups for allegedly uploading videos of himself killing kittens.



