Oviraptor

Oviraptor is a genus of dinosaurs from what is today Mongolia. "Oviraptor" was a relatively large-brained dinosaur which cared for its eggs. In 1924, an "Oviraptor" fossil was found on top of some eggs, and some thought that it had been eating the eggs. Others thought that the fossilized "Oviraptor" was probably a parent of the eggs in the nest, and not an egg stealer.

"Oviraptor" lived in the Upper Cretaceous period, about 75 million years ago. Only one definite specimen is known (with associated eggs), from Mongolia, though a possible second specimen (also with eggs) comes from the northeast region of Inner Mongolia, China.

"Oviraptor" is usually drawn with a distinctive crest, similar to that of the cassowary. However, re-examination of several oviraptorids show that this well-known, tall-crested species may actually belong to a relative of "Oviraptor", the genus "Citipati". It is likely that "Oviraptor" did have a crest, but its exact size and shape are unknown due to crushing in the skull of the only recognized specimen.

Judging by its relatives, "Oviraptor" probably had feathers. It had a toothless beak, but its feeding habits are unknown. The only "Oviraptor" fossil preserved the remains of a lizard in the region of its stomach cavity, implying that the species was at least partially carnivorous.

In 1976, Barsbold put six more brooding (nest sitting) specimens into the genus "Oviraptor", but these were later reclassified in the new genus "Conchoraptor". Another specimen, IGN 100/42, is perhaps the most famous, owing to its well-preserved complete skull and large size. This specimen was referred to the genus "Oviraptor" by Barsbold in 1981, and was presented as "Oviraptor" in popular magazines and scientific studies. However, this specimen, with its distinctive tall, cassowary-like crest, was re-examined by the scientists who described the nesting oviraptorids, and found to resemble them more closely than the original specimens of "Oviraptor". For this reason, they removed IGN 100/42 from the genus "Oviraptor", suggesting it was a species of "Citipati".


