Naruto (manga)

Naruto (written in Japanese) is a manga (Japanese comic) made by Masashi Kishimoto. It was also made into an anime (Japanese animated series). The main character and hero is called Naruto Uzumaki. He is a very energetic ninja who wants to become "Hokage". The Hokage is the strongest ninja and the leader of Naruto's village, called Konoha (meaning "leaf" in Japanese). He was in love with a girl called Sakura, in his early days, but, he then later realized Hinata Hyuga, a very shy girl, who kept it a secret that she liked him, was the one for him, he then married Hinata.

The manga was first published in 1999 in a Japanese magazine called "Shonen Jump". It was also translated into English. The anime was on TV for the first time in October 2002. In the United States, it started in September 2005.

Naruto is a long manga. The story finished in 2016. It is currently one of the most popular manga and anime. Since it began, a lot of Naruto fansites (websites made by people who like it a lot) were made with detailed information, guides and forums about the show. There is also a Naruto card game.

The anime was released after the manga, but it quickly caught up because an anime episode is likely to be around 2 to 3 manga chapters. To stop the anime from catching up with the manga, "filler" episodes are created. Filler episodes are not part of the manga storyline. They are just there to make people wait until there are enough manga chapters to make new episodes based on the manga. For example, in Naruto, after episode 135, the anime was catching up with the manga. They made "filler" episodes that ended in early 2007.

There are also four Naruto movies: "Naruto the Movie: Ninja Clash in the Land of Snow", "Naruto the movie 2:The Great Clash! The Phantom Ruins in the Depths of the Earth" and "Naruto the Movie 3: The Animal Riot of Crescent Moon Island", "Naruto: Shippūden the Movie 4.

Twelve years before the rest of the series, a giant nine-tailed fox named Kurama attacked Konoha (Naruto's village). To save the village, the Fourth Hokage (deceased) (leader of Konoha) sealed the fox's spirit inside a baby named Naruto Uzumaki. The Fourth Hokage had to die, but he was thought of as a hero in the village. He wanted people to think that Naruto was a hero, too. Sadly, most people thought of Naruto as the nine-tailed fox itself and hated him.

The people that knew that Naruto had the demon inside him could not tell anyone, but it did not stop them from being mean with Naruto. The people's children did not know about his secret, but they still hated Naruto because their parents hated him. Because of their bad behavior towards him, Naruto was very sad. As he grew up, he would make the first friends and then continue to make even more. Together, they went on great adventures and fight the villains of their land.

This is where a beginner learns to be a ninja.

Basically meaning lower ninja. Rank of missions they are sent to: D and C.

Basically meaning middle ninja. Rank of missions they were sent to: C and B.

Basically meaning high ninja. Rank of missions they were sent to: B, A, and S rank.

They are like ninja black ops and are assassins. They serve the village's Kage.

Naruto Uzumaki is the main character of this story. He is a ninja. He can use many jutsu (techniques), including a Shadow Clone jutsu which he excels at. He lives in Konoha. His dream is to become the Hokage. He is also the Seventh Hokage. After Sasuke left for Orochimaru, Naruto did a lot to try to convince him to come back to the Leaf Village, and not be with Orochimaru

Sasuke Uchiha is the rival and best friend of Naruto Uzumaki. He is one of Naruto's classmates. He is a survivor from the Uchiha clan and possesses the Sharingan, an ocular ninjutsu that can see through genjutsu, or copy moves from taijutsu or ninjutsu. He is very "Cool" and gets a lot of girls, like Sakura, and Ino.He seeks to avenge his family by killing their murderer, Itachi Uchiha (his brother). He later went on to serve Orochimaru, a bad guy in the series, his followers seek him for power. But at the finally battle of the series, he finally came back.

Kakashi Hatake is Naruto's teacher. He is a very brilliant ninja, who also possesses the Sharingan, even though he is not in the Uchiha clan. He lives in Konoha. He was given the Sharingan by his best friend, Obito Uchiha. He is the Sixth Hokage.

Sakura Haruno is the heroine in this story. She is one of Naruto's classmates. She has a crush on Sasuke Uchiha, but (in the earlier episodes) she feels Naruto is immature and clumsy. She lives in Konoha.

Jiraiya is the Toad Sage in this story. Later in the story, he becomes Naruto's teacher and mentor. He lives in Konoha and is most known as Pervy sage for his obsession for women.

Hashirama Senju is the First Hokage in this story and one of the people who created Konoha along with his friend Madara Uchiha. He is the older brother of Tobirama Senju, the Second Hokage.

Tobirama Senju is the Second Hokage in this story. He is the younger brother of Hashirama Senju.

Hiruzen Sarutobi is the Third Hokage in this story.

Minato Namikaze is the Fourth Hokage in this story and Naruto's father.

Tsunade is the Fifth Hokage in this story and is one of the Three Legendary Sannin along with Jiraiya and Orochimaru. Tsunade is the granddaughter of the First Hokage, Hashirama Senju and is also the former student of the Third Hokage, Hiruzen Sarutobi. 






