Tagbilaran

Tagbilaran is the capital and main city of the Bohol province, in the Bohol island, Philippines. Because of the Tagbilaran Airport, the city is an important way for tourists to start trips through the rest of the island and neigboring islands.

The inhabitants of this city are known as "tagbilaranons".

In 1565, a Spanish explorer named Miguel López de Legazpi came to Bohol looking for spices and gold. He made a peace pact with Datu Sikatuna in a place called Bool, now a district of Tagbilaran. This pact was signed with a blood pact between the two men.

On 9 February 1742, the Governor of the Visayas Francisco Antonio Calderon de la Barca separated Tagbilaran from Baclayon and made it a town with the name of "San Jose de Tagbilaran" and dedicated to St. Joseph the Worker. Since then, it was part of the province of Bohol and became officially a component city (a city that is part of a province) on 1 July 1966 by the Republic Act No. 4660.

Tagbilaran is in the southwestern part of the island of Bohol, in front of the smaller island of Panglao; between the two islands is the Tagbilaran Strait.

The city is southeast of the national capital of Manila and south of the regional capital, Cebu City.

It has a total area of , but the total land area, without the parts that are in the sea, is . The coastline is about long.

There is a ridge (a long and narrow chain of small hills) with an average altitude of that runs parallel to the coastline; at both ends of the ridge there are two hills: "Elley Hill" () in the north and "Banat-I Hill" () in the south.

Tagbilaran borders with the municipalities of Cortes (north), Corella (northeast) and Baclayon (east). To the south is the "Tagbilaran Strait" and the Panglao island, and to the west is the "Maribojoc Bay" (part of the Cebu Strait).

With a population of 96,792, Tagbilaran has a population density of inhabitants/km.

Tagbilaran has, like the rest of the Philippines, a tropical climate. The average temperature is high and the humidity is also high. The dry and the wet seasons are very similar.

The city of Tagbilaran is divided into 15 barangays (like neighbourhoods).




