Canigou

The Canigou () or Pic du Canigou is the highest of the mountains in Eastern Pyrenees; it is on the du Canigou, in the department of Pyrénées-Orientales, southern France.

Because it has sharp sides and is close to the Mediterranean Sea coast, until the 18th century the Canigou was believed to be the highest mountain in the Pyrenees.

Canigou is in the Regional Natural Park of the Catalan Pyrenees (; , often shortened as "Parc del Pirineu Català"), close to the eastern border of the park.

The Canigou peak is high. It is on a short mountain range, the Massif du Canigou, which is the eastern end of the Pyrenees. The mountain is the 395th highest mountain in France.

The first writings where the mountain is mentioned date from 949 with "Montis Canigonis" and "Monte Canigone" in Latin. The first written name of the mountain in Catalan ("Canigó") dates back to 1300, and from this comes "Canigou" in French.

The first ascent to Canigou was in 1285 by Peter III of Aragon, King of Aragon. This fact is mentioned in a chronicle written by Fra Salimbene, an Italian monk. It seems that the king did not go to the top of the peak.

Although the dominant climate is largely Mediterranean at its base, the Canigou has several climate zones:

Although variable from one year to the next, snow is generally continuous over , from mid-November to late May. The mean temperature in July is and in January is .

This mountain is a symbol for Catalan people. On its top there is a cross that is often decorated with the Catalan flag.

Every year on 23 June, the night before St. John's day ("nit de Sant Joan"), there is a ceremony called "Flama del Canigó" (Canigou Flame), where a fire is lit at the mountaintop. People spend the night there and take torches lit on that fire in a spectacular torch relay to light bonfires somewhere else. Some estimates conclude that about 30,000 bonfires are lit in this way all over Catalonia on that night.

The "Massif du Canigou" is a mountain range in the Pyrenees in the French department of Pyrénées-Orientales. It is the part of the Pyrenees nearest to the Mediterranean Sea.

There are two old monasteries at the foot of the mountain, "Martin-du-Canigou" and "Saint-Michel-de-Cuxa".

On 16 July 2012, the Ministry of Ecology, Sustainable Development and Energy of France named the "Massif du Canigou" as a Grand Site of France.

The main peaks of this mountain range are:



