Governor of Hawaii

The Governor of the State of Hawaii is the head of the executive branch of Hawaii's government and commander-in-chief of the state's military. The governor has a duty to enforce state laws. He also has the power to either approve or veto bills passed by the Hawaii Legislature, and the power to grant pardons, except in cases of treason and impeachment.

There have been seven governors of the state. Two have been elected to three terms. Three have been elected to two terms. The only one-term governor was the first, William F. Quinn. He also served a term as territorial governor. No state governor has resigned or died in office. No territorial governor ever died in office. George Ariyoshi was the first Asian American to be governor of any U.S. state. The current governor is David Ige. He took office on December 1, 2014.

The Republic of Hawaii was annexed by the United States in 1898. It became the Hawaii Territory in 1900. Hawaii became a state in 1959. The Republic had only one president, Sanford B. Dole. He was also the first territorial governor. Between 1893 and 1894, Hawaii was under the Provisional Government of Hawaii. It had no formal leader. Before 1893, Hawaii was a monarchy. Queen Lili'uokalani was the last Queen of Hawaii.

Hawaii Territory was organized on June 14, 1900. It was a territory for 59 years. Twelve people served as territorial governor. They were chosen by the President of the United States.

Hawaii became a state on August 21, 1959. The state was made up of Hawaii Territory without Palmyra Atoll. Since then, there have been seven governors. 

The governor is elected to a four-year term. It begins on the first Monday in the December after the election. The lieutenant governor is elected for the same term. Since 1964, they have been elected on the same ticket. The 1978 constitutional convention set a term limit of two consecutive terms for both offices. If the office of governor is vacant, the lieutenant governor becomes governor. If the governor is out of the state or unable to do their duties, the lieutenant governor acts as governor.

, five former governors were alive. The most recent death of a former governor was that of William F. Quinn (1957–1962), who died on August 28, 2006. 





