Lake Macquarie (New South Wales)

Lake Macquarie or Awaba, is the largest coastal salt water lake in Australia. It covers an area of . It is on the coast of New South Wales, north of Sydney. The city of lake Macquarie is on the shores of the lake. Lake Macquarie is connected to the sea by a short channel.

Aborigines of the Awabakal nation lived in the area for thousands of years. The name "Awaba", means "a plain surface".

The first European to discover the lake was Captain William Reid in 1800. Reid had been sent from Sydney to get a load of coal from Newcastle Harbour. Reid took a wrong turn and found himself in a lake rather than a river, with no coal to be seen anywhere. The name "Reid's Mistake" was used until 1826, when it was renamed in honour of Governor Lachlan Macquarie.

The lake is an irregular shape. The land between the lake and the sea is only a few kilometres wide along most of its length. There are several small, sandy, low-level islands in the lake. Pulbah Island, located south of Swansea is a large island with rocky cliffs. It covers an area of . Pulbah is an Aboriginal name meaning "island". Pulbah Island is also a sacred site for the Awabakal people.

Lake Macquarie is connected to the sea by Swansea Channel and Lakes Entrance. Swansea Channel is about wide and long. The bridges over the channel can lift to allow yachts and other boats in and out of the lake.

The eucalypt forests on the southern edge of the lake have been listed by BirdLife International as a 121 km Important Bird Area (IBA). They support significant numbers of endangered Swift Parrots and Regent Honeyeaters. Masked Owls and Ospreys often nest in the area.

In 1983 the State Pollution Control Commission studied the poor water quality of Lake Macquarie. It found increased amounts of sediment and increased levels of nutrients were causing problems. Further studies in 1995 found that creeks flowing into the lake were causing many of these problems. In 1998 a special group was set up by the government to find ways to protect the lake. This group recommended setting up the Lake Macquarie Project Management Committee. Their job was to put in place an action plan to protect the lake called the Lake Macquarie Improvement Plan. 

These actions have included reducing the amount of sediment and nutrients getting into the lake. They have built wetlands, stormwater treatments, replanting, and educating the local community.

There are more fish in the lake because commercial fishing has been stopped in the lake and the water quality is improving.

Fishing, boating, kayaking and water skiing are all popular activities on the lake. 


