Chernokids

Chernokids is a short French CGI-animated science fiction movie.

The movie "Chernokids" was made in 2010. It was made by five students from the film school named Supinfocom. Marion Petegnief, Matthieu Bernadat, Clement Deltour, Nils Boussuge, Florence Ciuccoli produced and directed the movie in 2010.

The movie was produced and directed by five students from Supinfocom. Supinfocom is a University in France. The University has a audiovisual and computer graphics program. Campuses are in Valenciennes, Arles and Pune. The school offers a five-year course of study that leads to a diploma of digital direction to its students, Matthieu Bernadat, Marion Petegnief, Nils Boussuge, Florence Ciuccoli, and Clement Deltour.

The movie was made in the genre of animated movies. The movie was made in the bizarre sub-genre. The movie was shot in 3-D. Illness and handicapped children were both themes in the movie. The movie was made all in Ukrainian. French translations were done by Roman Kozin and Nadia Myhal. The running time of the short movie was 6 minutes and 54 seconds. The screen format of the movie was Beta SP - DigiBeta. The movie was done in the aspect ratio of 16/9. The production company that made the movie was Supinfocom Valenciennes. The distribution of the short movie was handled by International Premium Films.

Animations for the movie were done by Matthieu Bernadat, Marion Petegnief, Nils Boussuge, Florence Ciuccoli, and Clement Deltour.


The children were each affected by the radioactivity in different ways. Each character was named based on their mutation.


Music for the movie was done by Nikolas Javelle, Yann Philippe, Sébastien Rouyer Fessard, Nikolas Javelle, and Yann Philippe.

The story follows four orphaned children's lives. One of them is a siamese twin. "In an orphanage somewhere in Ukraine a group of hideously deformed kids are about to visit their mother, the Nuclear Power Plant." The story happens after Chernobyl Nuclear Plant explosion.

The look and feel of the animation is somewhere between Pixar and a Slipknot music video that’s been burnt on one side and left out in the desert. The result is something that might play in a dank backroom of a short film festival (or out in the open of Fantastic Fest).

The movie "Chernokids" won the award for Best Digital Film at the Rome International [[Festival]] of Short Films & New Images (Arcipelago) during 2011 in Italy.

The movie was also in the running for awards at the International Documentary and Short Film Festival of Bilbao (Zinebi) during 2011 in Spain. The movie was also shown at the Brussels Cartoon and Animated Film Festival (Anima) during 2011 in Belgium. It was an international competition for professional films. The movie was also seen at the Clermont-Ferrand International Short Film Festival during 2011 in France.



