Air raid on Bari

The air raid on Bari was an air attack by German bombers on Allied forces and shipping in Bari, Italy. 

It occurred on 2 December 1943 during World War II. In the attack, 105 German Junkers Ju 88 bombers of "Luftflotte" 2 bombed ships from the Allied Italian campaign. They sunk 27 cargo and transport ships and a schooner in Bari harbour.

The attack, which lasted one hour, destroyed the port. It was not fixed until February 1944. The attack was called the "Little Pearl Harbor". 

The release of mustard gas from one of the cargo ships added to the deaths. The British and American governments hid the news about mustard gas and its effects on victims.

In 1943, during the Italian campaign, the port of Bari in southern Italy was important for Allied forces. Ammunition, supplies, and provisions were unloaded from ships at the port, then moved to Allied forces. 

Bari did not have good air defences. No RAF fighters were based there. There was not good anti-aircraft defences.

The Allies did not think the Germans could bomb Bari. They thought that the "Luftwaffe" in Italy could not do a major attack. 

German air raids by KG 54 had bombed the Naples port area four times in the previous month.

Thirty ships of American, British, Polish, Norwegian and Dutch registry were in Bari Harbour on 2 December. The port was lit on the night of the raid to help the unloading of supplies.
On the afternoon of 2 December, a "Luftwaffe" pilot flew over Bari. His report made Albert Kesselring order the raid. 

The Germans thought that destroying the port might slow the advance of the British Eighth Army. Only 105 Ju 88 bombers were available.

The attack started at 19:25, when two or three German aircraft circled the harbour at . They dropped "Düppel" (foil strips) to confuse Allied radar. 

The German bomber force surprised the Allies. They bombed the harbour and its ships and many of the bombs hit targets. Two ammunition ships were bombed. A petrol pipeline was cut and the fuel caught fire. The fire spread to many of the ships.

Twenty-eight merchant ships with more than of cargo were sunk or destroyed. Twelve more ships were damaged. The port was closed for three weeks. It was reopened in February 1944. 

One of the destroyed vessels—the U.S. Liberty ship "John Harvey"—had been carrying a secret cargo of 2000 M47A1 mustard gas bombs. Each held of the chemical. According to Royal Navy historian Stephen Roskill, the Mustard Gas had been sent to Europe to use if Germany used chemical warfare in Italy. 

The destruction of "John Harvey" caused liquid sulfur mustard from the bombs to spill into waters. The many sailors who had jumped into the water became covered with the chemical. 

Within a day, symptoms of mustard poisoning had appeared in 628 patients and medical staff. Symptoms included blindness and chemical burns. 

Hundreds of Italian civilians also seeking treatment, who had been poisoned by sulfur mustard gas. By the end of the month, 83 of the 628 hospitalized military victims had died. 

The Allies tried to hide the disaster. 
There were too many witnesses to keep the secret. In February 1944, the U.S. admitted to the accident. They said they did not plan to use chemical weapons unless Germany used them first.


