Deepika Padukone

Deepika Padukone (; born 5 January 1986) is a Danish–born Indian movie actress and model. One of the most popular and highest-paid Indian celebrities, she has established a career in Bollywood films, and is the recipient of two Filmfare Awards.

Deepika Padukone was born on 5 January 1986 in Copenhagen,Denmark to Konkani-speaking parents. Her father, Prakash, is a former badminton player of international repute, and her mother, Ujjala, is a travel agent. Her younger sister, Anisha, is a golfer. Her paternal grandfather, Ramesh, was a secretary of the Mysore Badminton Association. The family relocated to Bangalore, India, when Padukone was a year old. She was educated at Bangalore's Sophia High School, and completed her pre-university education at Mount Carmel College. She subsequently enrolled at the Indira Gandhi National Open University for a Bachelor of Arts degree in sociology, but later quit it due to scheduling conflicts with her modelling career.

Padukone's first screen appearance was in Himesh Reshammiya's music video "Naam Hai Tera" in 2005. Padukone made her film debut by playing the titular protagonist in the Kannada film "Aishwarya" (2006). Her first Hindi film release came the following year with Farah Khan's melodrama "Om Shanti Om", in which she played dual roles opposite Shah Rukh Khan. For her performance, she won the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut and also received a Best Actress nomination at the same ceremony. Her sole film role in 2008 was as one of Ranbir Kapoor's love interests in "Bachna Ae Haseeno".

Padukone's first film release of 2009, the kung fu comedy "Chandni Chowk to China" opposite Akshay Kumar, proved to be a box office flop. However, her next release, Imtiaz Ali's romance "Love Aaj Kal" grossed worldwide, and garnered her a second Best Actress nomination at Filmfare. Padukone had five film releases in 2010. The comedy "Housefull" was a commercial success, though her other four releases that year failed at the box office. The series of poorly received films continued with both her 2011 releases, the drama "Aarakshan" and the comedy "Desi Boyz".

The role of an impulsive party-girl in Homi Adajania's "Cocktail" (2012) proved to be a breakthrough for Padukone. Critics praised her performance and she received several acting nominations for it. The year 2013 was key for Padukone; three of her four releases that year earned over in India. Among these were two of the highest-grossing Bollywood films of all timethe romantic comedy "Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani" and the action-comedy "Chennai Express". She also won the Filmfare Award for Best Actress for portraying Leela, a character based on Juliet, in "Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram-Leela" (2013). In 2014, Padukone appeared in "Kochadaiiyaan", an animation film in Tamil, which was shot using motion capture technology. Also that year, she played a young widow in Adajania's "Finding Fanny" and a bar dancer in the ensemble heist film "Happy New Year". The following year, Padukone starred alongside Amitabh Bachchan and Irrfan Khan in Shoojit Sircar's critically acclaimed comedy-drama "Piku" (2015).



