Spinosaurus

Spinosaurus (which means 'spiny lizard') was a huge semi-aquatic dinosaur from the Cretaceous, 112 to 93.5 million years ago. It had paddle-like feet and nostrils on top of its crocodile-like head. This would let it submerge as a crocodile does.

The same research suggests it was perhaps larger than "Tyrannosaurus rex", but more clumsy on land, moving as a quadruped. All these ideas had been suggested before. The discovery of a more complete skeleton made palaeontologists think they were correct. The fossil was found in Morocco by a private collector who let scientists examine it.

"Spinosaurus" bones were first discovered in Egypt in 1912 by German paleontologist Ernst Stromer in 1915. Two species, "S. aegyptiacus" and "S. marocannus", are recognized by many paleontologists, but there may only be one. "Spinosaurus" looked like "Baryonyx" except it was larger and more heavily built. Six specimens of "Spinosaurus" have been uncovered. Apparently, good material was destroyed in a WW2 bombing raid.

"Spinosaurus" was larger than "Tyrannosaurus". Estimates published in 2005, 2007, and 2008 suggested that it was between 12.6–18 metres (41–59 ft) in length and 7 to 20.9 tonnes (7.7 to 23.0 short tons) in weight. A new estimate published in 2014 and based on a more complete specimen, supported the earlier research, finding that Spinosaurus could reach lengths of over 15 m (49 ft). It had a two meter high sail on its back like "Dimetrodon". Several uses have been suggested for this sail, such as to help control its body temperature, as a way to attract a mate, and to intimidate or frighten enemies. It lived in what is now Sahara Desert, but which then was mangrove forests alongside shoreline conditions, tidal flats and channels. 

The skull of "Spinosaurus" was long and narrow like that of a modern gharial. "Spinosaurus" is known to have eaten fish. Evidence suggests that it lived both on land and in water like a modern crocodilian.

It was featured as the main dinosaur in the 2001 film Jurassic Park III. It has also apppeared on postage stamps in several countries, and many toy companies have made models of "Spinosaurus".


