Kiddush

Kiddush () is a blessing said by Jews at the start of Shabbat and holiday meals. The term is also used to refer to a light meal served in the synagogue after the long Shabbat and holiday morning prayers. The word comes from a Hebrew root meaning "holy".

There are two versions of the Ten Commandments in the Bible. These versions use different words. The version in Exodus says "Remember Shabbat to keep it holy." The version in Deuteronomy says "Guard Shabbat to keep it holy." Jewish custom says that "remember" means to "celebrate" Shabbat. "Guard" means "resting"—not working or doing business.

There are many things Jews do to celebrate Shabbat [see Shabbat (Celebrating Shabbat)]. The minimum way to celebrate is to say the blessing "Blessed are You, God, Who makes Shabbat holy." The Talmud adds that the blessing should be said with a cup of wine. This is because wine makes people feel happy. Because of this, the Friday evening meal in a Jewish home starts with a ceremony to say this blessing over a cup of wine.

In traditional homes, the blessing is said in the Hebrew language. This is a Simple English translation of the blessing. Words in italics "like this" are added to explain the Hebrew.

There is a different version of Kiddush for the Shabbat morning (or noon) meal. This ceremony makes the meal feel more special. 

For the morning Kiddush, a person says verses from the Torah about Shabbat. These verses are usually from and . The person ends with the same blessing over the wine:
Most Jews do not say Kiddush at the third Shabbat meal. However, Maimonides ruled that they should do so. The text for this Kiddush includes . That verse is the source of the law to have three meals on Shabbat.

Kiddush is also said in the synagogue. This does not replace saying Kiddush at home before the meal.

Kiddush is said on these Jewish holidays: 
The holiday texts are different from the Shabbat texts. The blessings are said in the same way and at the same time of day as on Shabbat, but there are two differences:

Jews usually use a fancy cup for Kiddush. The most common material for this cup is silver. Other materials are also used. These include ceramic, glass and wood. The most important part of the custom is for the cup to be special and unusual in honor of the blessing.


