Concealed weapon

A concealed weapon is a dangerous weapon that is carried by a person and is hidden from view. It can also be a dangerous weapon under a person's control that is not readily visible. The term is most often applied to handguns. A dangerous weapon is any weapon that can inflict death or serious injury on another person. Various jurisdictions define what a dangerous weapon is. Carrying a concealed weapon is illegal as defined by laws of many states, provinces, and countries. The usual exceptions are law enforcement officers and members of the military who carry weapons as part of their jobs. Many jurisdictions may issue concealed weapons permits (also called concealed carry permits) giving individuals permission to carry a concealed weapon within their jurisdiction.

Carrying a concealed weapon (CCW) is the practice of carrying a handgun out of sight, hidden somewhere on a person's body. CCW is regulated by the states in the US. The laws vary, sometimes considerably, from state to state. As of 2015, most states grant licenses to carry handguns on a "Shall-Issue" basis to qualified applicants. Shall-Issue means the jurisdiction issuing the license must issue the license to anyone who is not otherwise prevented from owning a firearm. "May-Issue" allows the jurisdiction to decide on a case-by-case basis who may be issued a license. A few states are may-issue states, while seven states allow the carrying of firearms in a concealed manner without a permit (called Constitutional-carry). Gun laws vary considerably around the world. The larger majority of countries heavily restrict or do not allow citizens to carry firearms. Penalties for carrying a concealed weapon in the US without a permit can vary by jurisdiction. In some cases it is a misdemeanor but more often it is considered a felony. In Canada CCW is illegal but permitted under rare circumstances. In Mexico civilians cannot own guns since it has been illegal since 1968. However, most Mexicans own guns, even fully automatic weapons. In South Africa there are about 6 million licensed handgun owners. There is also a very large backlog of those applying for a license. Illegal guns can be easily bought off the streets. About 2,000 guns are stolen per month from licensed owners making it the largest source of illegal guns.


