Transformers: Age of Extinction

Transformers: Age of Extinction is a 2014 American science fiction action film based on the "Transformers" toy line. It was released on June 27, 2014, in IMAX and 3D. It is the fourth live-action "Transformers" film series. Like its predecessors, "Transformers" and "", "" and "Transformers 4" is directed by Michael Bay and produced by Steven Spielberg. The film's story is set four years after the events of the third film.

The young protagonists additions of Nicola Peltz and Jack Reynor. Kelsey Grammer as the main antagonist, with Peter Cullen, James Remar, Reno Wilson and Robert Foxworth returning as the voices of Optimus Prime, Sideswipe, Mirage, Brains and Ratchet. Mark Wahlberg as the father of the protagonist, Tessa Yeager. The cast also saw the additions of Stanley Tucci, Li Bingbing, Sophia Myles, and TJ Miller. The film welcomed John Goodman and Ken Watanabe to the voice casting roles of Hound and Drift. The film also welcomed John DiMaggio (whose role of Leadfoot), Frank Welker (whose role of Soundwave/Shockwave), Mark Ryan to the voice casting roles of Crosshairs, Galvatron and Lockdown.

Four years after an invasion that tore Chicago apart, a mechanic and his daughter discover Optimus Prime, which brings down all the Autobots, Decepticons, and a paranoid government agency upon them.




 Target/Leadfoot, the leader of the Wreckers. He transforms into a Chip Ganassi Racing #42 Target Chevrolet Impala.




Filming is expected to take place between April and November 2013 in London with a budget of $165 million once Pain & Gain, a film that Bay is also directing, is finished editing.

On January 8, 2013, it was announced that Reynor would be joining Wahlberg in the lead. On the Michaelbay.com forums, Nelson, the administrator of the website, confirmed that filming will take place in Chicago.

Filming is scheduled to begin in June 2013 with filming occurring in Detroit, Chicago, Austin, Los Angeles and Hong Kong. Bay released images of the new and upgraded vehicles to be the stars in "Transformers 4" May 28, 2013, alongside the announcement that they had begun filming in Monument Valley, Utah.

Filming is still in the works in Chicago. The McCormick Place in Chicago was changed to appear as if it were to be in China. Some streets including by the Willis Tower were also changed as if they were in China.

Ehren Kruger will pen the script and Steve Jablonsky will score the film.


