RAND Corporation

The RAND Corporation is a nonprofit global policy think tank first formed to offer research and analysis to the United States Armed Forces by Douglas Aircraft Company. 

The RAND was started in 1946 inside the Douglas Aircraft Company, and was set up as an independent corporation in 1948. The name was taken from R&D (research and development), though in fact it did no development. 

It is currently financed by the U.S. government and private endowment, corporations, the healthcare industry, universities, and private individuals. 

The organization now works with other governments, private foundations, international organizations, and commercial organizations on a host of non-defence issues. RAND techniques were based on operations research (O.R). which started in World War II. O.R. is the interdisciplinary application of scientific thinking to problem-solving. It relies mostly on the hard sciences like physics and mathematics, and economics. However, some famous biologists and social scientists have worked with RAND at times, and the importance of social ideas and thinking is more important than ever today.

RAND has about 1,700 employees and three principal North American locations: Santa Monica, California (headquarters); Arlington, Virginia; and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The RAND Gulf States Policy Institute has offices in New Orleans, Louisiana, and Jackson, Mississippi. RAND Europe is located in Cambridge, England, and Brussels, Belgium. The RAND-Qatar Policy Institute is in Doha, Qatar. RAND's newest office is in Boston, Massachusetts.

RAND is also home to the Pardee RAND School, which is the world's largest Ph.D.-granting program in policy analysis. Unlike many other universities, all PARDEE RAND Graduate School students receive fellowships in order to cover their education costs. RAND also offers a number of internship and fellowship programs allowing students and outsiders to assist in conducting research for RAND projects. Most of these projects are short-term and are worked on independently with the mentoring of a RAND staff members.

RAND publishes the "RAND Journal of Economics", a peer-reviewed journal of economics.

To date, 32 recipients of the Nobel Prize, primarily in the fields of economics and physics, have been involved or associated with RAND at some point in their career.


