Lance Storm

Lance Evers (born April 3, 1969) is a semi-retired Canadian professional wrestler known under the ring name Lance Storm and is best known for his time in known for his work in World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE), Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW), World Championship Wrestling (WCW) and Ring of Honor (ROH).

He currently runs a professional wrestling school in Calgary, Alberta called Storm Wrestling Academy.

He joined Extreme Championship Wrestling in 1997. He competed for ECW from 1997 to 2000. During that time, he won the ECW World Tag Team Championship with Chris Candido. They held the belts for 200 days and broke up. They feuded with each other after that and Storm introduced Tammy Lynn Bytch as his manager. The name Tammy Lynn Bytch was a parody of Candido's real life girlfriend Tammy Lynn Sytch.

After their feud was finished, Storm teamed with his trainee Justin Credible and named their tag team the Impact Players. The team won two ECW World Tag Team Championships and feuded with Jerry Lynn and Sabu and Tommy Dreamer and The Sandman. He also worked as a booker in ECW but left for the World Championship Wrestling to support his family when the company began to suffer financial hardships.

He joined World Championship Wrestling in 2000 and won the United States Heavyweight Championship, the Cruiserweight Championship, and the Hardcore Championship in rapid succession. He renamed the titles to the Canadian Heavyweight Championship, 100 kg and Under Championship, and Saskatchewan Hardcore International Title (S.H.I.T.) which also featured large stickers that covered the belts' faceplates.

He was also a member of the wrestling stable Team Canada which also featured Mike Awesome, Jim Duggan, Major Gunns, Carl Oulette, Jacques Rougeau, Elix Skipper and also Bret Hart for one night. The stable feuded with Misfits In Action. 

The WCW was purchased World Wrestling Federation in 2001 and portrayed as a serious, humourless heel. He was a member of The Alliance and was also the first WCW wrestler to invade a WWF program on the May 28, 2001 episode of Raw.

During his time in WWF, he won the WWE Intercontinental Championship and formed a tag team with The Hurricane. Storm and Hurricane feuded with the Hardy Boyz over the WWF and WCW Tag Team Titles. Team Alliance lost at the 2001 Survivor Series and Storm was fired (in storyline) along with the rest of the alliance roster by Vince McMahon.

Storm defeated The Rock with help from Test in a match which earned Storm a WWF contract. Storm formed The Un-Americans along with Christian, Test, and later William Regal. The Un-Americans lead angry tirades against the United States and waved an inverted American flag in the ring. Storm and Christian defeated Hulk Hogan and Edge at Vengeance to win the WWE Tag Team Championship. 

The stable broke up but Storm continued to tag with Regal with the same type of gimmick. With Regal, Storm won the World Tag Team Championship twice. Regal had health problems and Chief Morley said that they would be stripped of the titles. Morley teamed with Storm and they were named the World Tag Team Champions.

He was involved in a storyline where Stone Cold Steve Austin, who was an authority figure at the time, told the fans to chant "boring" during Storm's matches. Goldust helped improve Storm's charisma and turn Storm into a fan favorite. He reformed his tag team with Morley but they didn't really get a push.

He turned into a heel again and was tired of pleasing the fans and how it was just a waste of his time. He was squashed by Rhyno immediately thereafter which turned Rhyno into a fan favorite once again. This would turn out to be Storm's last appearance on Raw.

In April 2004, he then decided to retire from in-ring action and accepted a position backstage with WWE where he worked as a wrestling trainer in Ohio Valley Wrestling. He resigned from WWE in May 2005 and intended to open his own training school in his hometown of Calgary, the Storm Wrestling Academy. After he left the WWE, Storm competed in the Independent circuit for a while which also included Ring of Honor. He still competes in the independent circuit from time to time. 










Since retiring, he runs a professional wrestling school in Calgary, Alberta called Storm Wrestling Academy.

He is married to his wife Tina and they have two daughters, Rachel and Rebecca.



