Emo

Emo is a genre of music which is short for "emotive hardcore." The genre first formed in the mid-1980s, taking the stylistic formulas of hardcore punk and post-hardcore and combining them with the introspective and sensitive lyricism that emo has become so well known for. In the mid 1990s, emo incorporated indie rock elements. This ultimately made the emo bands of the 90's much less aggressive and 'punk-ish' and more melodramatic. Once it became mainstream in the 2000s, it became shaped by pop-punk, (a fusion genre of emo and pop punk exists, and is known as "emo-pop") alternative rock and melodic hardcore. The birthplace of the emo genre is often referred to as Washington, D.C., mainly because the first known emo band, Rites Of Spring, formed there.

Today, emo is more often associated with fashion than with music. Emo (sometimes referred to as "scene") is a teen subculture, though many people use "emo" as an insult. Emo kids are stereotyped as wearing dark (especially black) clothes, mostly wearing tight shirts, skinny jeans and Converse shoes. Most Emo girls and some boys wear thick "raccoon" eyeliner. They are also stereotyped as having black dyed hair, or naturally colored with streaks or coon-tails, or unnatural-colored with fringe bangs, of which usually sweep over one eye. The emo culture is also associated with being depressed, introverted, shy and cutting.

The emo culture is sometimes confused with the goth and the scene culture. Goth, scene and emo are similar in some ways, but have many major differences. Especially the emo and scene culture are very similar to each other, by being associated with the same clothes and hairstyles. Emo and scene are therefore more similar to each other than emo and goth are. Emo is different than scene music wise. Emo and goth are different belief wise.

One of the founding bands of the emo genre was Rites of Spring. Present emo bands include, Hedley (band), The Used, Circle Takes the Square, and Hawthorne Heights. Older emo bands include Garbage, The Get Up Kids, Sunny Day Real Estate, Gray Matter, Jimmy Eat World and Still Life.

In recent years the term emo has been applied by critics and journalists to a variety of artists, including multi-platinum acts such as My Chemical Romance, Fall Out Boy and disparate groups such as and, Paramore and Panic at the Disco, even when they protest the label.



