Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni

Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni is a commune and subprefecture of the French Guiana, an overseas region and department of France that is in northern South America.

Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni is a border town in northwest French Guiana. It is the second most populous city of French Guiana, after Cayenne.

The name was given in 1856 by the Governor of French Guiana, Auguste Laurent Bauding, after his father and grandfather. Because the town is on the side of the Maroni river, the name was completed as is now: "Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni".

The town was made a "commune" in 1949. In 1969, it was made the capital of the new arrondissement of Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni.

Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni is a city in northwestern French Guiana to the west of Cayenne, on the Maroni River (in Dutch: "Marowijne"), opposite the town of Albina in Suriname which can be reached by ferry or small boats.

The "commune" has an area of ; at the city hall, the altitude is .. It includes some islands in the river: "Île Portal", "Île de la Quarantaine" and "Île aux Lépreux".

The Maroni river flows through the "commune", to which it gives part of its name. Many of its tributaries also flows the "commune": Crique Sparouine (on the southern border), Crique Bastien, Crique Serpent, Crique des cascades, Crique Awara, Crique Balaté, Crique Margot, Crique Chameau, Crique aux bœufs lamentins and Crique Vaches (on the northern border).

Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni is surrounded by the "communes" Mana to the north and east, Grand-Santi to the south and southwest and Apatou to the northwest.

Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni has a Tropical rainforest climate (Köppen climate classification: Af) in which there is no dry season - all months have mean precipitation values of at least .

The average temperature for the year in Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni is . The warmest month, on average, is September with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is January, with an average temperature of .

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni is . The month with the most precipitation on average is May with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is October with an average of .

The inhabitants of Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni are known, in French, as "Saint-Laurentins" (women: "Saint-Laurentines").

The "commune" of Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni has a population, in 2014, of 44,169; its population density is of inhabitants/km.

Evolution of the population in Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni




