Turn Left, Turn Right

Turn Left, Turn Right is a Taiwanese picture book by writer Jimmy Liao. It is his classic work.

The lead female character is living in an old apartment building on the edge of the city. Every time she goes out, no matter where she goes, she always habitually goes left first. The lead male character is living in an old apartment building on outskirts of the city. Every time he goes out, no matter where he goes, he always habitually go right first. He never meets her. But the city is like a maze, it lets people see the same scene, go the same route, to the same destination; their habits make people's lives not change. Habit doesn't only make people have a sense of security but an inexplicable loneliness, and their habits will make them miss something. 

She was used to turning left and he was used to turning right, but they never had a meeting with each other in the pictured fiction story, “Turn Left, Turn Right.” It was the first long fiction story written by Jimmy Liao, talking about the feelings between a man and a woman. The fiction story gives a detailed account of a very interesting relation in living between the leading man and the leading woman in chapter one. There are many bright ideas in this pictured fiction story including the lines and color, with much attention to detail, and good order changes. This book is not only one of his best fiction stories but also one of the greatest works of art. Jimmy Liao said that this fiction story’s idea began when one day he was too troubled to draw by the loud noises of workers from next door. He could not help but think specially pleasing thoughts on that day. All of a sudden, he got money from someone he never knew who was living nearby. He started imagining what would come about to this leading man and woman character 1 if they never knew they were neighbors but actually slept right next to each other only separated by only one thin wall. What if, the leading man and woman characters ran into each other not frequently, and they never talked to each other about where they lived? They may never see each other again if they did not have knowledge that they were people living next to each other. 


This book became a movie in 2003. Warner Brothers Studios produced it. Gigi Leung and Takeshi Kaneshiro starred in it. The scenes are mainly in Taipei. For example: Beitou Hot SpringsXimen-cho hiking area, Taipei MRT Station Warner Village、Taiwan Railway Sungai Station, Minsheng shequ fu jin street, and Taipei City Yangming Hospital.



