Lawrence Lessig

Lawrence "Larry" Lessig (born June 3, 1961) is an American academic and political activist. He is known for his work in reducing legal restrictions on copyright, trademark, and radio frequency. He has been an activist against the Second Amendment and created the Second Constitutional Convention.

Lessig was born in Rapid City, South Dakota, the son of Patricia, who sold real estate, and Lester L. "Jack" Lessig, an engineer. He grew up in Williamsport, Pennsylvania. He studied at the Wharton School, at Trinity College, Cambridge, and at Yale University. For a year, he worked as a clerk in Chicago.

Lessig started his academic career at the University of Chicago Law School, where he was Professor from 1991 to 1997. From 1997 to 2000, he was at Harvard Law School, holding for a year the chair of Berkman Professor of Law, affiliated with the Berkman Center for Internet & Society. He subsequently joined Stanford Law School, where he established the school's Center for Internet and Society.

Lessig returned to Harvard in December 2008 as Professor and Director of the Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics. In 2013, Lessig was appointed as the Roy L. Furman Professor of Law and Leadership; his chair lecture was titled "Aaron's Laws: Law and Justice in a Digital Age." In 2013, Lessig was also awarded an honorary doctorate by the Faculty of Social Sciences at Lund University, Sweden.

Lessig is currently considered politically liberal. As a law clerk, however, he worked for both Judge Richard Posner and Justice Antonin Scalia, two influential conservative judges.

Lessig has emphasized in interviews that his philosophy experience at Cambridge radically changed his values and career path. Previously, he had held strong conservative or libertarian political views.

In August 2015, Lessig announced that he was exploring a possible candidacy for President of the United States in the 2016 election. On September 6, 2015, Lessig announced that he would run for the 2016 Democratic presidential nomination. Almost two months into the campaign trail, poor polling numbers and not being qualified to enter the debates, Lessig dropped out on November 2, 2015.

Lessig is married to Bettina Neuefeind. He is the father of three children (Willem, Teo, and Tess).



