Chatham Main Line

The Chatham Main Line is a railway line in England linking London Victoria to Dover Priory / Ramsgate, Via Medway (and Chatham).

Most train services on the Line are run by Southeastern.

While travelling between Bromley South and London Victoria, the trains can either travel on the Main Line, through Beckenham Junction, Herne Hill and Brixton, or can go via the Catford Loop Line, travelling through and , and then just past it either picks up the Southeastern line all the way, or can follow the Southern (Atlantic) Line through before crossing back over to the Southeastern Line to London Victoria. Some services travelling via now stop at .
As of 13 December 2015, the off-peak timetable consists of two trains per hour from Victoria, calling at , , , , , and Rainham.

There is an hourly service from Victoria calling at (via the Catford Loop), , then all stations to Gillingham. It then becomes a semi-fast service, calling at Rainham, , , , terminating at .

A High Speed Service consists of two trains per hour from to via and .

A service operates in the opposite direction. There is one other High Speed Service that runs on a small part of the line, starting from and calling at and before heading to , and , then picking up the High Speed Line and calling at the remaining stations to .

In December 2015, engineers carried out a survey of the railway line running between Dover Priory and Folkestone Central and discovered that a section of sea wall carrying the line had eroded away, and suspended the service. A replacement bus service operated between Dover Priory and Folkestone Central. The High Speed services via Chatham terminated at Ramsgate, with a shuttle bus service running between Ramsgate and Dover Priory via Sandwich.
From Ashford International, the High Speed service terminated at Folkestone Central. After just over 8 months, this section of line reopened on 5 September 2016 and normal services have resumed.

The following trains are operated on the line: Class 395 "Javelin", Class 375 "Electrostar", Class 465 "Networker" and Class 466 "Networker".



