Austin Petersen

Austin Wade Petersen (born February 19, 1981) is an American producer, writer, political activist, and commentator. He was the runner-up for the Libertarian Party's nomination for President of the United States in 2016, finishing second place to former governor Gary Johnson with 21% of the vote. 

As of 2016, Petersen is the owner and CEO of a photo and video consulting firm called Stonegait LLC and is the founder of "The Libertarian Republic" and "Liberty Viral", both libertarian news and commentary websites.

Petersen was born in Independence, Missouri, but raised on a farm in Peculiar, Missouri. He is the son of Donna and John D. Petersen. He studied at Missouri State University, where he graduated with a degree in musical theater.

Petersen was running for President of the United States in the 2016 presidential election for the presidential nomination for the Libertarian Party. 

After Gary Johnson won the nomination for President of the United States of the Libertarian Party (United States), Petersen delivered a concession speech. During the speech, Petersen said, "You have my full support, my full respect, and my gun!" and proceeded to gift Johnson with a replica of George Washington's flintlock pistol. Petersen could not, however, endorse Johnson's preferred Vice Presidential candidate, former Massachusetts Governor, William Weld. He threw his support to ballot access lawyer Alicia Dearn. Afterwards, Gary Johnson threw away the pistol that Austin Petersen had given him.

Petersen has stated his intention to return home to spend time with his family, to relax, and to recover from the strenuous months of campaigning. He looks forward to supporting Gary Johnson's presidential campaign and working to further the ideals of the Libertarian Party (United States).

A few months after losing the Libertarian Nomination for President Petersen has done Facebook Live streams where he talks about current political issues and has stated he is interested in running for President in 2020.

On July 4, 2017, Petersen announced that he is running under the Republican Party in the 2018 Missouri Senate race against current Democratic Senator Claire McCaskill.



