Queen Rania of Jordan

Queen Rania of Jordan (; born Rania al-Yassin and sometimes called Rania al-Abdullah; born on 31 August 1970 in Kuwait City, Kuwait) is the Queen consort of Jordan. After she married Abdullah II of Jordan, she became known for her work in education, health, community empowerment and micro-finance. She also uses social media often (Facebook, Twitter and YouTube). She has two daughters and two sons. She has been given many awards by governments.

Rania al-Yassin was born in Kuwait to Palestinian parents. She went to the New English School in Jabriya, Kuwait. She got a degree in business administration at the American University in Cairo. Before graduating from the American University, she worked with Citibank and Apple, Inc..

Queen Rania of Jordan has launched and fought for many initiatives in education and learning.

In July 2005, in partnership with the Ministry of Education, the King and Queen created the Queen Rania Award for Excellence in Education. It is an annual award for teachers.

Queen Rania is the chairperson of Jordan's first children's museum. It was opened in May of 2007. It encourages lifelong learning for children and their families. In 2007, Queen Rania began a program to renovate 500 of Jordan's schools in a period of five years. Queen Rania is also chairperson of the Royal Health Awareness Society (RHAS)..

Queen Rania created the Jordan River Foundation in 1995. This foundation works to empower society, especially women and children, to improve the quality of life and make a better future for all Jordanians. She also created the Jordan River Children Program (JRCP). This program wants to place children’s well-being above politics and cultural taboos. After two children were killed in Jordan because of child abuse, Queen Rania called for an emergency meeting to discuss where the system was failing.

On 30 March 2008, Queen Rania launched her own YouTube channel. It was originally to invite viewers to give their opinions on the Middle East and talk about the stereotypes they may have of Arabs and Muslims.




