Work (Rihanna song)

"Work" is a song by the singer Rihanna. It is from her eighth studio album, "Anti". The song features rapper Drake. It was released on January 27, 2016. It was the most heard song for its first day on the over 1,200 stations monitored by Nielsen music. A few hours after its release, it was sent to digital outlets such as iTunes and Google Play Music. Rihanna announced via Twitter that "Work" was the lead single for "Anti". As of February 2017, the song has been certified quintuple-Platinum in the US for sales and streams equal to five million copies.

The song was nominated for Record of the Year and for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance at the 59th Annual Grammy Awards in 2017.

The song has reached number one on the iTunes charts of over 70 countries. "Work" debuted at number 9 on the "Billboard" Hot 100, which made her one of the artists with the fifth-most top-ten singles in "Billboard" history (with 27 top-ten songs), along with singer-songwriters Mariah Carey, Janet Jackson, and Elton John. In addition, the song also managed to enter the R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart at number one. So far, "Work" has reached number two in the UK and topped charts in Canada. The song became Rihanna's 14th and Drake's second number-one single on the US "Billboard" Hot 100. Rihanna now has the third-most number-one songs in Hot 100 history and the second-most for a female artist. She passed Michael Jackson's record of 13 number-ones and is behind Mariah Carey's 18 chart-toppers and The Beatles' 20 number-one songs. "Work" is the third longest-running number-one song of 2016, with nine weeks at the top of the "Billboard" Hot 100 (The Chainsmokers' "Closer" featuring Halsey has spent 12 weeks at number one, and Drake's "One Dance" has spent ten weeks at the top). The song was later replaced at number one by rapper Desiigner's first single, "Panda".

"Work" is about a relationship that has turned bad and using work as a distraction from the relationship. It is a reggae-pop and dancehall song.

The music video was released on February 22, 2016, two days after Rihanna's 28th birthday. It first appeared on the streaming service Tidal and was later uploaded to YouTube/Vevo. The first half of the video contains scenes of a club and shows Rihanna performing Caribbean dance moves with short hair. The second half is a different version of the video, which contains a couch and neon signs, while Rihanna, wearing much longer hair, sings to Drake, and is wearing a sheer shirt. Drake is present in both versions of the video.


