Anarcho-capitalism

Anarcho-capitalism is a political philosophy that says that governments are not needed but that property rights are needed.

Anarcho-capitalism says that governments are not needed because governments either do not work or are bad.  Governments are said to be bad because they use force to get things done.  Examples of government force include:

Anarcho-capitalists say that society would be better off if the few "good" things that governments do were instead done on the free market by private individuals, private companies, charities, mutual aid societies, and voluntary unions.  Anarcho-capitalists think that people will still be safe without armies and police that are paid for with taxes.  Anarcho-capitalists say that people will be able to protect themselves by paying people or "private defence agencies" to defend them, or by setting up neighbourhood watches.  They also think that when people get into fights or arguments about who owns what, people should be able to get together and decide what kind of court to go to and what kind of rules they should be judged by, instead of being forced to go to a court that the government sets up.

The term "anarcho-capitalism" was coined by Jarret B. Wollstein.  It is called "anarcho-capitalism" because it is a mix of (1) the individualist anarchist idea that governments are bad and unnecessary, and (2) the capitalist idea that private property is good when it has been gotten in a legitimate way instead of through force.  Anarcho-capitalists say that the government is a thief, because it takes people's money away against their will.  Governments also keep people from making trades between themselves.

Most libertarians are minarchists, which means they think that there needs to be a very small government whose only purpose is to protect people's property.  Anarcho-capitalists are different because they believe society would be better off without any government, even though they are still a kind of libertarian.

Like other anarchists, anarcho-capitalists are against the whole idea of hierarchy.  But, unlike other anarchists, anarcho-capitalists do not define hierarchy as something that exists when one person is simply "seen" as being more important than another person.  Anarcho-capitalist believe hierarchy exists only when a person is given the authority to use force against a nonviolent person person or that person's legitimate property.  Only when "no one" is allowed to use force against nonviolent people or their legitimate property are people truly equal.  Only then is hierarchy no more.

Some classical anarchists oppose anarcho-capitalism because they do not believe any private property is legitimate.  These anarchists would say that all property is founded on the theft of the commons (unowned land and stuff).  Many anarchists don't even think that anarcho-capitalism counts as a real form of anarchism, as this critique of property goes back to some of the earliest people calling themselves anarchists.

Anarcho-capitalists, like other libertarians and classical liberals, only believe property is legitimate when it has been gotten in the right sort of way.  If you steal (take something from someone without her permission), or hire someone to steal on your behalf, or ask the government to steal on your behalf, the property you get is not really yours.  The "real" owner is still the person or people it belonged to before it was stolen.  Anarcho-capitalists say that governments do not legitimately own anything, since governments get all of their wealth through force, including taxation and counterfeiting.

In the eyes of anarcho-capitalists, property can only be legitimately gotten in one of three ways.  The first way is through John Locke's "homestead principle," which means that something owned by no one "becomes" your legitimate property when you "mix your labour" with the thing.  In other words, if you come across an unowned field, and you start farming it, then the land you farm becomes your property, along with all of the crops you grow.  If someone else comes along and steals all of the crops you worked on growing, that person has committed a form of force called "theft."  The second and third ways to legitimately get property is through voluntary trade or gift.

If someone has gotten something in an illegitimate way, it is not theft to take the thing back, as long as you harm no innocent person in the process.

Some anarcho-capitalists are also anarcho-pacifists, but most anarcho-capitalists are not.  Anarcho-pacifists, like Robert LeFevre, believe one may never use any force at all, not even in self-defence.  Most anarcho-capitalists, however, believe it is okay to use defensive force as long as it is "only" directed against those who have used non-defensive force, and as long as it is proportional to the non-defensive force.  In other words, one may not legitimately shoot a person for stealing a stick of gum, because shooting someone is a lot more forceful than stealing the gum.

The following is a list of some notable nonfiction works discussing anarcho-capitalism.

Anarcho-capitalism has been looked at in certain works of literature, particularly science fiction.  An early example is Robert A. Heinlein's 1966 novel "The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress", in which he explores what he calls "rational anarchism."  A contemporary anarcho-capitalistic work of science fiction is John C. Wright's "The Golden Age".

In "The Illuminatus! Trilogy" by Robert Anton Wilson, the Discordian Society, headed by the character Hagbard Celine, is anarcho-capitalist.  The manifesto of the society in the novel, "Never Whistle While You're Pissing," contains Celine's Laws, three laws regarding government and social interaction.

Cyberpunk and postcyberpunk authors have been interested by the idea of the breakdown of the government.  Some stories of Vernor Vinge, including "Marooned in Realtime" and "Conquest by Default", feature anarcho-capitalist societies, sometimes made to look good, and sometimes not.  Neal Stephenson's "Snow Crash" and "The Diamond Age", Max Barry's "Jennifer Government", Cory Doctorow's "Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom," and L. Neil Smith's "The Probability Broach" all explore anarcho-capitalist ideas.  Anarchy in cyberpunk fiction ranges from the very bad to the very good.

Ken MacLeod's Fall Revolution series looks at the future results of the breakdown of today's political systems during a revolution.  The second novel of the series, "The Stone Canal", deals with an anarcho-capitalist society and looks at issues of self-ownership, privatisation of police and courts of law, and the results of a contractual society.

In Matt Stone's (Richard D. Fuerle) novelette "On the Steppes of Central Asia", an American graduate student is invited to work for a newspaper in Mongolia, and finds out that the Mongolian society is stateless in a way similar to anarcho-capitalism.  The novelette was originally written to advertise Fuerle's 1986 economics book, "The Pure Logic of Choice".

J. Neil Schulman's novel "Alongside Night" shows a society using agorism to successfully becoming a market anarchist society.

"Sharper Security: A Sovereign Security Company Novel", part of a series by Thomas Sewell, is "set a couple of decades into the near-future with a liberty view of society based on individual choice and free market economics" and shows a society where individuals hire a security company to protect and insure them from crime.  The security companies are sovereign, but customers are free to switch between them.  They behave as a combination of insurance/underwriting and para-military police forces.  Anarcho-capitalist themes in the book include a look at what would happen if sovereign immunity is not forced onto people, and a look at privately-owned road systems, a "laissez-faire" market, and competing currencies.

Sandy Sandfort's, Scott Bieser's, and Lee Oaks's Webcomic, "Escape from Terra", looks at a market anarchist society living on Ceres
and its interaction with the violent statist society on Terra.



