United States Army trucks

In 1915 the US Army started testing trucks that were made to go off-road. Could they replace horses? Trucks could carry bigger loads and were easier to take care of. A truck can run as long as it has fuel and a good truck should not break. A horse has to be fed, rested, and can get sick. The tests showed the trucks were better than horses. The Army started replacing all horses and mules with trucks. One of the testers, Lieutenant Dwight D. Eisenhower, later became the President of the United States and started the Interstate Highway System.
Army trucks are measured by how many tons (907 kg) a cargo model can carry (The same truck can have different bodies). They also measure the number of wheels that drive. Off-road trucks have all the wheels driving. 2 axles are 4x4, 3 axles are 6x6, and 4 axles are 8x8. (Dual tires are counted as one wheel).

Until the 1990s most Army trucks had the engine in front of the cab. In the US this is called "convential". In Great Britain this is called "bonneted". In the 1990s the Army changed to new types. Most new types can have an armored cab. Medium and large trucks have the cab over the engine ("COE"). The front of the cab looks flat. Most trucks in Great Britain and Europe are COE. A new large size truck has the cab in front of the engine ("forward control"). There are two axles under the engine. Both axles steer.

The Army uses the same parts in many trucks. They also use different parts in the same truck. A truck engine, transmission, and other parts can be from different companies. Different builders can build the same trucks.

The Army still uses many old trucks. They were built very strong and can be fixed with new engines and transmissions. The Army also uses civilian trucks. Large semi-tractors with three rear axles tow tanks on trailers. Civillian medium and heavy trucks (some with armored cabs) are also used.

The US Marines use many Army trucks but they also have their own types.

The Army used gasoline engines until the 1960s (in Great Britain gasoline is called "petrol"). In the 1960s they started switching to diesel engines. Some ("multi-fuel") could use some gasoline or jet fuel mixed in with the diesel fuel. Now the Army uses the same diesel engines as civilian trucks.

Almost all trucks have water-cooled inline 6 cylinder (I6) engines. Jeeps have inline 4 cylinder (I4) engines.
Some -ton trucks have V8 engines. There are a few strange engines.

Almost all old Army trucks had manual transmissions. Now most have automatic transmissions. A transfer case is mounted behind the transmission. It sends power to the front axle. In manual transmission trucks it has a very "low" gear that can go very slowly on bad ground. Automatic transmission trucks do not need a "low" gear.
A "ladder frame" had two rails going front to back with smaller rails connecting the two (it looks like a ladder). A front solid driving axle was mounted on leaf springs. Tandem (two axles together) axles are mounted differently. They have leaf springs and arms to hold the axles. Some have the spring over the axles. Some have the leaf springs below the axles. A few extra-heavy duty models use a simple but stronge "walking beam" type.
In 1914 World War I started in Europe and the British began buying American trucks. Trucks like the "Bulldog" Mack were good but roads in Europe were muddy and bad.

In 1915 the Army was chasing Mexican revolutionary Pancho Villa in Texas and Mexico. 4x4 trucks by the FWD Company and Jeffery Company were tested and passed. They were built for World War I. Each truck was also built by three other companies.

The Army liked more than one company building the same trucks. More could be built. If one company had problems the other companies could keep building the trucks. A standard "Liberty" truck was built by 15 different companies. But most trucks in World War I were made from many small companies and broke down.

In the 1920s the Army built and tested a few trucks. The truck builders didn't do much. Then in 1930 the Army built an test group of trucks. The "Standard fleet" had different sizes. They were strong and reliable but only test trucks were built. The American truck builders said the Army was taking their business away. The Army had to stop building trucks. It was the Great Depression and the Army had very little money for trucks. Builders starting making test models in 1935. By 1939 more than 20 builders had made and improved test models.
In 1940 the Army wanted all new off-road trucks. They wanted , , , and 5-ton 4x4s. They also wanted , 4, 6, and -ton 6x6s. Trucks were tested and changed. Good trucks were built in large numbers. Some good trucks were built by more than one company. (6-ton trucks were built by 5 companies). In some sizes more than one type were built. There were 3 different -ton trucks built. Trucks were named after their builder and model. Sometimes they are named by their size and powered wheels (-ton 6x6). "M" numbers name the body.

During World War II the US made a large number of trucks and loaned many to other allied countries. In 1945 all truck building ended. With the war over there were too many trucks to use. Many were left with the countries that used them. "Jeeps" and "-ton" trucks could be found all over the world. Most were used by armies, but some were sold to civilians.
After World War II new trucks were planned. Many trucks had worked well, but there were too many types. Companies built their own types. The Army wanted types that anybody could build. They also wanted fewer types. There would be and -ton 4x4s and 2½, 5, and 10-ton 6x6s. Trucks used many of the same parts. All large trucks used the same cab. The fenders and hoods looked the same. 

1950 is when "M" numbers started naming the truck and body. Every truck, with every body, has it's own number. (A M35 is a cargo truck and a M36 is the same truck with a longer cargo body).

These types didn't change much for 25 years. A new "Jeep" (M151) was used from 1960. The -ton changed to a civilian type -ton size. The larger trucks were fixed up but were still the 1950s types.
In the 1980 the Army began using new truck types. Truck types began to be named with letters. Most can be armored. Dual tires are no longer used on new trucks. On most trucks the tire air can go up or down while the truck is moving. This is called "Central Tire Inflation System" (CTIS).

The small truck is the -ton HMMWV ("Hum-V" or "Hummer"). It started being used in 1983. It is made just for the Army. It is not a changed civillian truck.

The same European type trucks are used for and 5-ton sizes. The -ton size has 2 axles (4x4) and the 5-ton size has 3 axles (6x6). Most parts are the same for both.

A new very heavy duty 10-ton 8x8 (4 axles) was built just for the Army. They have many bodies and some can be changed. Many have cranes to load the truck.


