M.G.Ramachandran

Marudur Gopalan Ramachandran popularly known as MGR, was an Indian actor and politician who served as Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu for ten years between 1977 and 1987. MGR is a cultural icon in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu, where he is regarded as one of the most influential actors of the Tamil film industry.
MGR was born in Kandy, Sri Lanka, to Malayali family Melakkath Gopala Menon and Maruthur Satyabhama. MGR joined the DMK party and later was excluded by Karunanidhi. MGR formed a new party after this, he named it Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam. MGR's first married Chitarikulam Bargavi, also known as Thangamani who died early due to an illness. He later married Sathanandavathi for the second time who also died soon after marriage due to tuberculosis.In 1965, M.G.R. married V. N. Janaki a former Tamil film actress for the third time.Janaki divorced her husband, Ganapati Bhatt to marry MGR.

In 1936 MG Ramachandran made his debut film named Sathi Leelavathi.His victorious film started its account in 1950, the film of Manthiri Kumari. He became popular through the films of Malaikallan, Alibabavum 40 Thirudargalum, Thirudadhe, Enga Veettu Pillai, Aayirathil Oruvan, Anbe Vaa, Mahadevi, Panam Padaithavan and Ulagam Sutrum Vaalibhan. He acted as a hero in the first colour motion film in Tamil cinema, the Alibabavum 40 Thirudargalum. His film of Rickshawkaran won him the National Film Award for Best Actor in 1972.Ulagam Sutrum Vaalibhan hit blockbuster in 1973 was filmed in various countries like Malaysia, Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore etc. His acting career ended in the year 1987 with the film Ulagam Suthi Paru, in which he acted with Kidney problems.
MGR was a member of the Indian National Congress till 1953. He joined in Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam getting attracted by the party founder C.N.Annadurai.He became a Dravidian nationalist and prominent member of the DMK. He was first elected to the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly in 1967. After the death of his mentor and party leader, C. N. Annadurai, MGR became the treasurer of DMK in 1969 after Karunanidhi became the Chief Minister.In 1972, MGR was expelled by M.Karunanidhi from DMK due to some issues.He formed a new party in the name Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam.After successfully winning the 1977 state elections, MG Ramachandran became the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu on 30 June 1977, remaining in office till his death in 1987.


