Kumar j. doctor

Dr.Kumar J. Doctor is an Indian Ophthalmologist, a Daljit Singh’s Gold Medal Award 2002 on 27th September and also won an award in field of Reflective surgery by the Chief Minister of Maharashtra, Late Sri.Vilasrao Deshmukh. He specializes in removal of spectacle power by Excimer laser with LASIK surgery and Cataract Removal by Phacoemulsification with foldable and Multifocal I.O.L Implantation.

Dr. Kumar J. Doctor is a Chief Medical Director of Doctor Eye institute established in 1964.Dr. Kumar J. Doctor is known as a renowned ophthalmologist, recognized for his expertise in the areas of Refractive &amp; Cataract Surgery. He regularly conducts video Instruction Courses presents Free Papers, Posters and Videos on Cataract and Lasik in many national and international conferences. He is a member of ASCRS, ESCRS, AIOS, and AIIS etc.

He has done live multiple demonstrations in Cataract Surgery and Lasik Surgery. He has demonstrated Live surgery at Kuala Lumpur in Malaysia, SAARC Conference in Colombo Hospital-Sri Lanka and made multiple presentations All over India including Apollo Hospital- New Delhi, Arvind Eye Hospital- Madurai, L V Prasad Hospital-Hyderabad, Rotary Eye Hospital-Navsari, and also at various conferences in Delhi, Patna, Chennai, Bangalore, Indore, Lucknow, Allahbad, Guwahati, Baroda, Ahmedabad, Rajkot, Uttaranchal, Dehradun etc. Dr. Kumar has also presented several films and videos showing the innovative surgery techniques and case presentations winning several awards for the same.

International Conferences conducted

Dr. Kumar J. Doctor has successfully organized and conducted 3 international Conferences to showcase the newest developments in the field of Cataract and Refractive Surgery. The conferences were attended by renowned International, National and Local Ophthalmologists which offered an excellent opportunity to enhance experience and share their knowledge. Dr. Kumar is on the Advisory Panel in Abbott Medical Optics for IOL designs and material and NOVARTIS for the Genteal study.

He was member of Scientific Committee - AIOS from 1999 to 2005. He was an Editor of Vision Restoration Asia Pacific Journal as the Chief Editor of the Journal of BOA (Bombay Ophthalmologists’ Association) for 3 years.
Dr.Kumar was the President of IIRSI

He graduated in medicine (MBBS) and the Chief Medical Director of Doct Eye institute, Mumbai also a member of All India Ophthalmological Society:AIOS}, American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery: ASCRS].He has done live multiple demonstrations in Cataract Surgery and Lasik Surgery. 

He has received Best Paper Award at ASCRS, Best Video Award at APAO and his poster was awarded 2nd prize in keratorefractive category in ASCRS 2011.

He has received several awards & contributed many chapters in ophthalmology books. To name the few are, Daljit Singh Gold Medal Award by then CM of Maharashtra, Shri Vilasrao Deshmukh and Best Academic Private Practitioner Award in the silver jubilee conference of MOS . 

Dr. Kumar has also received Best Paper Award at ASCRS, Best Video Award at APAO and his poster was awarded FIRST 10 POSTERS submitted worldwide in THE BEST POSTER’S category in ASCRS 2010 and 2nd prize in keratorefractive category in ASCRS 2011. At 12th Schwind World User's Meet Dr. Kumar was declared and awarded ‘First Ophthalmic   Surgeon in the world” who successfully performed Presbyopic Lasik in Pseudophakic patients with brilliant results. Most recently this year Dr. Kumar Doctor received the Best Entertainer award for his presentation at OPL in APA0 2015, held at Guangzhou, China.
In recent years, he has popularized the latest innovations in ophthalmic surgery, namely Femto-Laser assisted BLADELESS LASIK and Cataract Surgery with various range of IOLs including SYMFONY , an extended range of vision IOL for the 1st time in WESTERN INDIA.


Contributed in "Treatment of Chronic Pain by Interventional Approaches: the AMERICAN ACADEMY of Pain Medicine" text book on patient management.


