Sandwich

A Sandwich Is A Double-decker Food Containg tomatos lettuce cheese and medium size Children.

A sandwich is not limited to a single layer of filling between two pieces of bread. It can have more than one layer of filling and bread. Each layer of filling is commonly referred to as a "deck". For instance, a single decker sandwich would be the standard two slices of bread and one layer of filling. A double decker sandwich will have three slices of bread with two layers of fillings. Generally one piece, is one piece of bread cut in two with a filling between each piece. 

The double decker sandwich is so called because each layer of filling forms a deck, much like a double decker London bus. A club sandwich is a double decker sandwich with chicken, bacon and salad. A triple decker sandwich would consist of four slices of bread with three layers of fillings.

A sandwich with only one slice of bread is called an open sandwich or an open-face sandwich. The filling is placed on top of the bread. An open sandwich is often eaten with a knife and fork, although it can be picked up and eaten by hand.

Another form of sandwich is the toasted sandwich. The toasted sandwich can be made from slices of toast instead of bread or the sandwich is toasted whole in an oven or a sandwich presser.

Sandwiches made with different types of bread might be given unique names. A panini, for example, is usually a sandwich on a small roll or loaf which is pressed between two heavy, heated grill plates. 

Sandwiches can also be called by many other names in different parts of the world such as 'grinder', 'sub', 'hoagie' and 'wedge'.

There are many different types of sandwiches. Examples are:


There are many types of filling that can be placed within a sandwich. These include:


Open-face Bread > Filling 

Standard Sandwich Bread > Filling (possibly bread) > Bread 

Double Decker Bread > Filling A > Bread (Standard Sandwich) 

Triple Decker Bread > Filling A > Bread > Filling B > Bread 

In one episode of "The Apprentice", the apprentices were required to make sandwiches for Donald Trump.

In the French film "Taxi" the protagonist is made a special sandwich with half Bayonne ham, half Paris. This later sparks the jealousy of another character.

In the Warner Brothers cartoon "Scooby Doo", Scooby was well known to love making sandwiches with Shaggy having many layers, often with a great variety of fillings.

In the television series "Buffy", during episode 61, Buffy eyes a classmate eating a sandwich, snatches it and hungrily scarfs it down.

In the television series "Star Trek", Scotty used the word sandwich to refer to the makeup of a piece of technology which was made of three layers of two materials, which caused the food synthesizer in the galley of the USS Enterprise to believe that he was requesting a meal. Scotty canceled the process by kicking the offending unit. 

The largest sandwich ever made was made by Wild Woody's Chill and Grill, Roseville, Michigan. It weighed 5,440 lbs.


