Pirates of the Caribbean

Pirates of the Caribbean is a franchise by Disney. It includes a theme park ride, a series of movies, video games, and novels. The movies have grossed more than $2.7 billion.


Jack Sparrow, known to many people as Captain Jack Sparrow, is a smart and nice pirate and the main protagonist in all the films of the series. He is played by Johnny Depp.

Jack Sparrow was captain of the black and white sailed ship called the "Black Pearl". However, after a mutiny led by his first mate Hector Barbossa, he was marooned on an island with nothing but a gun holding one bullet and a bottle of rum . However, he survived for three days on the island. There were many rumors about how he escaped the island, many of them glorifying Sparrow. In reality, Sparrow had discovered a smuggler's cache of rum and waited for the smugglers to come rescue him.

He assembles a crew to help him re-claim the "Black Pearl". After the curse is lifted from the crew of the "Black Pearl", he kills Barbossa using the gun he was left with when he was marooned. He re-claims his position as captain of the "Black Pearl".

In the fifth film Jack helped by Will's son Henry and Barbossa's dora Carina Smyth destroy Poisedon's Trident for defeating the evil spanish ghost Salazar and free Will from Flyng Dutchman's serving and now he is now again the captain of the Black Pearl.

Captain Hector Barbossa, commonly called Barbossa, is a pirate. He is played by actor Geoffrey Rush.

Barbossa was Jack Sparrow's first mate who later becomes his toughest enemy. He led the mutiny against Sparrow, and became captain of the "Black Pearl". He and his crew became cursed after stealing a chest of cursed Aztec gold. Just as the curse is lifted, Jack Sparrow shoots Barbossa (using the bullet from the gun left with him when he was marooned). This shot kills Barbossa. However, he is brought back to life by Tia Dalma to rescue Jack Sparrow from Davy Jones' Locker.

Barbossa was brought back to free Tia Dalma too. Tia Dalma was actually in the process of reviving Barbossa when Jack showed up and traded the cursed monkey for a jar of dirt to ward off Davy Jones. His boot can be seen in the shot if one looks closely enough. Jack hadn't died yet when she started to revive Barbossa. This was also, very likely, Tia Dalma's reasoning behind helping the others rescue Jack without charging and when she now about what was happened to Jack make a second deal with Barbossa.

William "Will" Turner is a blacksmith who lives in Port Royal yet is very good with a sword. He was played by Orlando Bloom.

After being found in the wreckage of a ship at sea, Will Turner was taken aboard a ship traveling to Port Royal. There, he became a blacksmith's apprentice. He falls in love with Elizabeth Swann, the governor's daughter, and wants to marry her but she plays hard to get.In the end he finally marries her in the middle of an awful fight called Malstorm. However, after killing Davy Jones, he became captain of the "Flying Dutchman", which allows him to make port only once per ten years.

Is a beatiful girl who is the Port Royal's Governor's dora who later becomes James Norrington fiance after he propois to her.

Later being saved by Jack Sparrow and Will Turner and after becomes the girlfriend of Will Turner and later married him.

In the second and third film she shows her evil side when trapped Jack on the Pearl for let him eat by the Kraken and gave Jack to Davy Jones for re-have Will, but despite this Jack the first time survived (he finish in Davy Jones's locker but later escape with the help of her, Will, the resurrected Barnossa, Tia Dalma and his crew) and the last time escape from the prison of the Flyng Dutchman and one time free fight Davy Jones.

Despite this two infamous actions Elizabeth is a good person and later she quest sorry to Jack after have fighting side to side with Jack self Cutler Beckett and save Port Royal and the all pirates.

Now she is Jack's friend and former love interest and Will's wife and Henry's mother.

Tia Dalma is the human form of the goddess Calypso. She is played by Naomie Harris.

Little is known about Tia Dalma. She once had a relationship with Jack Sparrow when they were "inseparable". It was in this time when she gave Sparrow his compass. She was Davy Jones' lover at one point. She was the one who turned him into a monster, after he cut his heart out for her.

She is revealed to be the nymph Calypso, bound to human form by the Brethren Court.

Davy Jones is captain of the "Flying Dutchman". He is played by Bill Nighy who plays him with the motion capture converted with the moving of Nighy.

Davy Jones was human now turned into a monster after he cut his heart out for Calypso. He is the captain of the "Flying Dutchman", a ship crewed by those offered a second chance at life for a hundred years. Their job is to ferry souls to the afterlife. However, Davy Jones uses the crew for his own purposes. This has caused him and the crew to transform into monsters resembling sea life.

Davy Jones was killed by Will Turner aboard the "Flying Dutchman".Will was stabed by Davy Jones and then Bootstrap charged at Davey Jones and attacked him. But when Davey Jones got a grip on him he took out his sword and was going to stab Bootstrap just as Jack sparrow took the heart out of the chest and helped Will stab it with a broken sword.

Davy Jones did not cut his heart out "for" Calypso. He cut his heart out "after" she betrayed him by not showing up the one day Davy Jones was allowed to make port. He was so hurt that he cut out his own heart, refusing to have those feeling near him. This is also the reason Davy Jones tought the brethren court how to bind Calypso to human form.

He died when Jack and Will destroy his heart but a the end of the fifth film thanks to the destruction of Poseidon's Trident he is back from the dead and will appear in the sixth film.

Sao Feng is a Pirate Lord of the Brethren Court. He is played by Chow Yun-Fat.

Sao Feng is the pirate lord of the South China Sea. He is known for betraying anyone, even his friends, to get on the winning side. He says this is "just good business". He often uses a dao (a Chinese single-edged sword), as his weapon of choice.

Elizabeth and Barbossa visit Sao Feng to request a ship and a crew. Feng is suspicious and informs them that earlier that day someone broke into his uncle's temple and attempted to steal the navigational charts to World's End. He reveals the thief to be Will Turner. Barbossa and Elizabeth deny knowing Will, but when Feng threatens to kill him, Elizabeth reacts, confirming they are allies. Barbossa explains that the Brethren Court has been summoned to meet at Shipwreck Cove and Feng, being one of the nine Pirate Lords, is honor bound to attend. Feng demands to know why they want to sail to the Locker. When Will admits they want to rescue Jack, Feng becomes angry and declares that he would only bring Sparrow back to life to kill him in person. Barbossa reminds Feng that Jack is one of the nine Pirate Lords and is still in possession of a "piece of eight," a pirate lord's symbol and didn't have a successor to give it to before his "death."

Joshamee Gibbs, known as Mr. Gibbs, is a pirate. He is played by Kevin McNally.

Mr. Gibbs is right hand man to Jack Sparrow. He helps Jack Sparrow assemble a crew to go after the "Black Pearl". He is very superstitious. Not much is known about his past, aside from the fact he had served in the Royal Navy at one point.

Weatherby Swann is the governor of Port Royal, and is father to Elizabeth Swann. He is played by Jonathan Pryce.

Governor Swann wanted Elizabeth to marry James Norrington. However, he did not mind when she chose Will Turner instead, because he wanted her to be happy.

He was assassinated by an employee of the East India Trading Company under Beckett's orders.

Pintel and Ragetti are pirates. Pintel is played by Lee Arenburg, and Ragetti is played by Mackenzie Crook.

Pintel and Ragetti were part of the crew on the "Black Pearl". They took part in the mutiny led by Barbossa, and each became immortal after taking part of the cursed chest of Aztec gold. Ragetti has a wooden eye, which is in fact Barbossa's Piece of Eight. They often are comic relief in the movies.

Bill Turner, often called Bootstrap, is a pirate played by Stellan Skarsgård.

Bootstrap is Will Turner's father. He was part of the crew of the "Black Pearl" with Jack Sparrow as captain, but he did not take part in the mutiny. After stealing the Aztec gold (meaning he was cursed, and immortal) Bootstrap felt bad for the part he played in the mutiny against Jack. He stuck up for Jack, so Barbossa strapped him to a cannon and sent him to the depths, unable to breathe yet unable to die (as said by Bootstrap himself in Dead Man's Chest). Davy Jones offered him a way out of his eternal torture, and Bootstrap Bill accepted. Thus he becomes part of the crew on the "Flying Dutchman" with Davy Jones. He also chose to be on the ship with his son William Turner after agreeing to leave every ten years to give his wife and his son a visit.

The Kraken is a fictional sea monster. It is based on the mythical beast in mythology (extremely redundant). It is a sea monster that does the bidding of Davy Jones. When summoned by him, it arises from the ocean. Often Davy Jones tells it to destroy ships that he believes threaten or annoy him. The Kraken kills Jack Sparrow and destroys the "Black Pearl" but Jack lived. The Kraken is Killed in fact by Davy Jones.He has a lizardy kind of skin.

Captain Teague is pirate, and is Keeper of the Code for the Brethren Court. He is played by Keith Richards.

Teague is Jack Sparrow's father. He is the former Pirate Lord of Madagascar, but he resigned to become Keeper of the Code.

Anamaria is a female pirate. She is played by Zoë Saldaña.

Not much is known about her, other than her ship was stolen by Jack Sparrow at one point. She becomes part of Jack Sparrow's crew in helping him find the "Black Pearl".

Lieutenant Gillette is a British Royal Navy officer. He is played by Damian O'Hare.

Gillette is James Norrington's Flag-Lieutenant. He survives the battle on the "HMS Dauntless".

Lieutenant Groves is a British Royal Navy Officer. He is played by Greg Ellis.

Groves is a British Royal Navy Officer. He served under the command of James Norrington. He also serves as Beckett's second-in-command aboard the "Endeavour" when it is destroyed by the "Flying Dutchman" and the "Black Pearl". When Beckett gives no commands for the crew, he orders them to abandon ship.

Mercer is an employee of the East India Trading Company. He is played by David Schofield.

Mercer is Beckett's assistant. Beckett often uses Mercer to carry out his "dirty" work, such as assassination and spying.

When much of the privates dies Davy Jones is free from Beckett and kill Mercer for re-having the key of his chest.

Giselle and Scarlett are prostitutes from Tortuga. Giselle is played by Vanessa Branch. Scarlett is played by Lauren Maher.

Both women often flirt with Jack Sparrow. They both also often slap him for lying to them.



