Byun Baek-hyun

Byun Baek-hyun (hangul: 변백현; hanja:卞白贤; born May 6, 1992 in Bucheon) better known for his mononym name Baekhyun, is a South Korean actor, singer, dancer and TV presenter. He is a member of the boy band EXO where he performs as lead vocalist and dancer.

Baekhyun was born in Bucheon, Gyeonggi Province on May 6, 1992. He has an older brother named Baek-beom, who is seven years older. 

Baekhyun began training to be a singer at age 11, influenced by Rain. He attended Jungwon High School in Bucheon, where he was the lead singer of a band called 상태 상태 (Coma), which won at a local music festival. Baekhyun received piano lessons by Kim Hyun-woo from DickPunks.

In addition to musical activities, Baekhyun was formed as a martial artist in his youth and obtained a black belt in Hapkido.

Baekhyun was discovered by an agent of S.M. Entertainment when he was practicing for his admission exams for the Seoul Institute of Arts. Then he joined the company by S.M. Casting System in 2011.

He and his fellows Chanyeol and Suho attend Kyung Hee University taking culture and arts classes in the Department of Business Administration.

Baekhyun was the last member to join EXO and was officially revealed as the ninth member of the group on January 30, 2012.

In February 2014, Baekhyun and his partner Suho became regular hosts for SBS's "Inkigayo" television program. They left the program in November 2014 to focus on the comeback of EXO. In July 2014, Baekhyun made his musical theater debut, playing the lead role of Don Lockwood in South Korean production of the musical "Singin' in the Rain" by SM C&C.

In April of 2015, Baekhyun released its first song solo since its debut titled "Beautiful" like the soundtrack of the drama "EXO Next Door". The song became the first soundtrack of a web drama that was within the best positions of several musical lists. In May of 2015, Baekhyun was announced that it would be the protagonist of the action film "Dokgo" alongside actor Yeo Jin-goo. However, the film's production was announced to be canceled in January 2016. In December 2015, Baekhyun paid a tribute to the late South Korean singer Kim Hyun-sik performing his song "Like Rain Like Music" on "SBS Gayo Daejeon's" end-of-year music program. The recording of a song performed by Baekhyun was digitally published.

In January 2016, Baekhyun and Suzy of Miss A performed a duet entitled "Dream". The song quickly reached the best position in the music charts after it positioned itself in the first place of Gaon Digital Chart. "Dream" also won five times the first place in "Music Bank" and "Inkigayo". In April 2016, Baekhyun received a YinYueTai V-Chart award for being the Most Popular Singer in South Korea. In May 2016, Baekhyun and South Korean singer K.Will released a duet titled "The Day" as part of SM Station.

In August 2016, Baekhyun made his acting debut on the small screen in the historical drama "", a South Korean adaptation of the Chinese novel "Bu Bu Jing Xin". For his performance in the drama, received a prize like New Star in 2016 SBS Drama Awards. He also collaborated with his labelmates Chen and Xiumin on a soundtrack titled "For You" for the drama. In October 2016, along with Chen and Xiumin, Baekhyun became a member of the first official EXO unit, EXO-CBX. His debut was on October 31 with the release of the extended play "Hey Mama!". In November 2016, Baekhyun began to participate S.M. Entertainment's "League of Legends" tournament "2016 S.M. Super Celeb League", where he and his labelmate, Heechul, played with professional players and fans from China and South Korea. 

In February 2017, Baekhyun and Soyou of Sistar released a duet titled "Rain" The song peaked at number one on several music charts and achieved an achievement known as "all-kill", making it the first artist of S.M. to achieve an "all-kill" in 2016 and 2017 with "Dream" and "Rain", respectively. In April 2017, Baekhyun released a single titled "Take You Home" for the second season of SM Station. The song was positioned in the twelve position of Gaon Digital Chart.

On June 19, 2014, S.M. Entertainment confirmed that Baekhyun along with another recording artist, Taeyeon of the girl band Girls' Generation were in a relationship. In September 2015, S.M. Entertainment confirmed that they were finished.

Notes



