Tunguska event

Tunguska event is the name for an event that occurred on 30th June 1908 in Siberia. Most eyewitnesses talk about one or more explosions that happened around 7.15 local time. The cause of these explosions is unknown. About around the place where the event happened, trees were uprooted. In Wanwara, a small settlement, about away, windows and doors were smashed. It is estimated, that in an area of about trees were uprooted. Over away, light was seen, and an earthquake was felt. 

There are no reports of people who have died. This is attributed the fact that almost no people lived in the area, at the time. Depending on the source, there are one or two casualties.

Today, it is believed that the event happened about to above ground, at 0:14 UTC (7.14 local time).

What happened is called air burst today. At the time, the energy involved was estimated to be between 10 and 30 megatons of TNT, depending on the height in which the air burst happened. Simulations that have been done with modern computers have found that the energy involved was probably between 3 and 5 megatons of TNT. Taking 15 megatons, this would mean that the energy involved was 1.000 times that of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima, in 1945. The shock wave is consider to be that of an earthquake with a magnitude of 5.0 on the Richter scale. For these reasons, the Tunguska event is considered the largest impact event on Earth in recorded history. 

At first, there was no interest in the event. Over a decade after the event, Leonid Kulik, a Russian mineralogist led an expedition to the area. In his expedition of 1921 and 1922, he only got to Kansk, which is 600 km away from the "epicenter" of the event. In 1927, Kulik reached the region where the event happened, in 1938 he ordered aerial photos be taken.

Kuliks expedition is the first recorded expedition to the area. Since then, there were many expeditions; over 1,000 articles have been published on the event; most of them are in Russian.

There were two other expeditions to the area: one in 1958, the other in 1963.

Today, there is no explanation for what caused the explosions, or for what happened. There are different theories, though.

A meteorite hit the area. The most probable is an asteroid or comet of low density, and a diameter of between and . The object exploded in a height of 7 to 14 km above ground; for this reason there is no impact crater. The problem with this theory is that meteorites of this type usually do not reach low levels of the atmosphere. Meteoroids, which contain more iron have a higher chance of reaching low levels of the atmosphere, but they do not cause such devastating explosions. 

Lake Cheko is a small freshwater lake, about from the center of the event. The lake does not show on maps of the area which are older than about 1928. Before 1908, it seems to be unknown. The lake is rectangular; it is 708 metres long, 364 m wide, and about 50 m deep. In 1999, Luca Gasperini did a study on the sediments in the lake, and found that the lake predates the event of 1908.. In 2007, National Geographic cites him as he states that it is possible the lake formed as an impact crater.

The other theory is that the event has a geophysical cause: About 10 million ton of natural gas exploding would have the effect that was observed. The problem with this theory is that eyewitnesses spoke of a very bright light that could be seen form very far away. A natural gas explosion does not produce a bright light. 


