Mount &amp; Blade: Warband

Mount & Blade: Warband is an expansion to the Action role-playing game video game "Mount & Blade". First announced in January 2009, the game was made by TaleWorlds Entertainment and was published by Paradox Interactive on March 30, 2010. The game can be downloaded from the TaleWorlds Website and on Steam or through DVD. 

"Warband" adds to the Mount and blade by introducing another faction to the game and also allows players to use political options, and allows the player to start their own faction. "Mount & blade: Warband" also has some multiplayer modes. Reviews of the game are often good, often stating the like for multiplayer.

The main changes to the game was the adding of multiplayer , the adding of a sixth faction, Sarranid Sultanate, and the change of the game map. The adding of political options. A player who is not with a faction to capture a town or castle and start their own faction. The player can travel the map, and fight along the way. The goal is to have one faction controlling all of the map.

The multiplayer mode removes all of the RolePlaying and the map from the single-player mode. It focus' more on direct combat with other players. Each player starts new with a basic character, later players can buy weapons, horses and armour, with gold earned by playing. The player's multiplayer and single-player characters are not linked, they were 8 modes.

"Napoleonic Wars" is a multiplayer-only DLC developed by Flying Squirrel Entertainment for "Mount & Blade: Warband." It "was" set during the last years of the Napoleonic Wars. The servers can hold up to 200 players it has five selectable nations. It was released on April 19, 2012. 

The multiplayer has different game modes such as team deathmatch, siege, capture the flag, duel, battle, and commander battle, for players to battle on. There are also community-organized events that pit player-created "regiments" against one another. Most of these regiments are based on actual regiments from the Napoleonic Wars. The regiments work together to create organized events, such as line-battles, sieges and groupfighting.


