Anti (album)

Anti is the eighth studio album by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna. It was released on January 28, 2016 as a download and for streaming on the music website Tidal. The song was released by Roc Nation and Rihanna's own label, Westbury Road. "Anti" is her first studio album since 2012's "Unapologetic".

It was believed that Rihanna's songs released in 2015—"FourFiveSeconds" (featuring Kanye West and Paul McCartney), "Bitch Better Have My Money", and "American Oxygen"—would be released as a part of "Anti". However, these songs were ultimately released as singles by themselves.

The "Los Angeles Times" reported that the album was downloaded over one million times in only 14 hours of its release. The standard and deluxe versions were made available on iTunes a day after the standard edition was released on Tidal. The album first appeared at number 27 on the "Billboard" 200 album chart and reached number one the next week. This is Rihanna's second US number-one album after "Unapologetic".

"Anti" was certified platinum in the United States by the Recording Industry Association of America the day after its release. On April 29, 2016, the Recording Industry Association of America certified the album double platinum for shipments and streams equal to 2 million copies. As of July 2016, "Anti" and rapper Drake's album "Views" are the only albums released in 2016 to be certified double platinum in the US. "Anti" became the fifth-best performing album in the US in 2016.

Rihanna tweeted that the album's lead single was "Work", featuring Canadian rapper Drake. The song ultimately reached number one on the iTunes charts of over 70 countries. "Work" has topped the "Billboard" Hot 100 for nine weeks in a row, making it the longest-running number-one single of 2016 by a lead female artist. It became Rihanna's 14th and Drake's second number-one song in the United States. It also topped the charts in Canada and France, while reaching number two in the UK and number five in Australia. "Work" was the fourth-best performing song of 2016 in the US. It has become certified 5× Platinum by the RIAA.

"Kiss It Better" and "Needed Me" were announced as the second and third singles from "Anti". "Kiss It Better" performed moderately on the charts, while "Needed Me" became Rihanna's 29th top-ten song in the US. It reached number seven there and was ranked number 13 on the "Billboard" Year-End Hot 100 of 2016. "Kiss It Better" was certified Platinum by the RIAA, while "Needed Me" reached 4× Platinum status.

"Love on the Brain" was announced as the fourth single from "Anti". It reached number eight in the US. "Love on the Brain" is Rihanna's 30th top-ten hit on the "Billboard" Hot 100. It was certified Platinum in the US.

On October 8, 2015, Rihanna uploaded the title and artwork to the album, which is a childhood photo of Rihanna on her first day of daycare. She worked with artist Roy Nachum, who edited the image, added a gold crown over her eyes, and painted over her in red and white. The back cover uses the same photo shot from the back. The album was also known as "#R8". Rihanna said that whilst she was recording the album, she would like to make another vintage album like her fourth studio album, "Rated R"(2009).



