United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit

The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit is one of the 13 appeals courts in the United States's federal court system. In case citations, the Court's name is abbreviated "1st Cir."

The Court of Appeals for the 1st Circuit is the appeals court that has jurisdiction, or legal power, to review cases decided by less powerful courts in the 1st Circuit. These less powerful courts are called United States district courts. They are federal trial courts. If someone wants to appeal a decision that one of these courts made, they would have to appeal to the Court of Appeals for the 1st Circuit.

These are the United States District Courts that are located in the 1st Circuit:

The Court is based at the John Joseph Moakley Federal Courthouse in Boston, Massachusetts.

The First Circuit is the smallest of the thirteen United States courts of appeals. As of 2016, the Court has six full-time judges and six judges on senior status. Senior status is like being partly retired. Three of the Senior Judges do not hear any cases. The others may hear cases if they choose to.

Since he retired from the United States Supreme Court, Justice David Souter regularly sits on the First Circuit "by designation." This means he is a visiting judge who comes to hear cases at the First Circuit, to add his knowledge and experience.

The Court usually "sits" (meets at the Courthouse and hears cases) for one week a month, eleven months per year. Court sittings are held in the mornings, usually between 9:30 AM and 1:00 PM (EST). For one month out of the year either July or August the Court takes a summer break and does not meet.

This is the Court's normal schedule:

On March 3, 1891, the United States Congress created the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit. Congress approved two judgeships for the Court (it allowed two judges to sit on the Court).

On January 28, 1915, Congress passed a law that added the District of Puerto Rico to the First Circuit. The law said that the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit would hear appeals from Puerto Rico's district court.

Over time, Congress approved more full-time judgeships for the Court:



