Cornway College

Cornway College (or simply Cornway) is a private, day and boarding school for boys and girls in Mount Hampden, Mashonaland West, Zimbabwe, Africa. It is from the Harare central business district. Cornway College was opened on January 23, 2006. It has a preparatory school ("Cornway Junior College") and a high school ("Cornway Senior College"). The language used to communicate within the school is English.

Cornway College was ranked as one of the top 10 high schools in Zimbabwe in 2014.

Students at the Junior College are taught the primary schools curriculum developed by Cambridge International Examinations or CIE (an exam board in the United Kingdom) and ZIMSEC (an exam board in Zimbabwe). The children learn the following subjects:
In Grade Seven, children write tests for the Cambridge Primary certificate by CIE (for English, Mathematics and Science subjects) and Grade Seven exams by ZIMSEC (for English, General Paper, Mathematics and Shona subjects).

Students in Form One and Form Two (Year 8 and Year 9) are taught several subjects according to the Zimbabwe Junior Certificate curriculum.

In Form Three and Form Four (Year 10 and Year 11), students are taught according to the curriculum of CIE and ZIMSEC. In Form Four, the students then write tests for the International General Certificate of Secondary Education (given by CIE) and the GCE Ordinary Level certificate (given by ZIMSEC).

In the Sixth Form (that is, Lower Six and Upper Six, or Year 12 and Year 13), students learn a minimum of three subjects according to the Advanced Level curriculum of CIE and ZIMSEC. In Lower Six, students can choose to write tests for the Cambridge International AS Level certificate (half the content of Advanced Level is tested, the certificate is given by CIE) then write tests again in Upper Six for the full Cambridge International A Level certificate. Another option is to write the Cambridge International A Level and or the ZIMSEC GCE Advanced Level tests in Upper Six.

Sports at the Junior College include:
Sports at the Senior College include:



