Immortals (2011 movie)

Immortals is a 2011 American adventure-fantasy movie directed by Tarsem Singh. It is loosely based on the myths of Theseus, the Minotaur and the Titanomachy. The movie it stars Henry Cavill, Freida Pinto and Mickey Rourke. It was released on November 11, 2011. The reviews were mixed to negative. But it was a commercial success.

Before the age of man or beast, the immortals wage war on each other in the heavens. The winners become the gods. The ones who were lose become the Titans who were imprisoned in Mount Tartarus. During the war, a powerful weapon called the Epirus Bow was lost. In 1228 B.C., the Heraklion king Hyperion (Mickey Rourke), lays waste to Greece searching for the bow. With it he can free the Titans and destroy the gods who failed to save his wife and children from dying of disease. Hyperion captures the virgin oracle Phaedra (Freida Pinto). This was in the hopes that her psychic visions will help him locate the bow.

Meanwhile, the people of a village prepare to flee to Mount Tartarus to escape from Hyperion's soldiers. One of them is the warrior Theseus (Henry Cavill). He was mentored by a mysterious old man (John Hurt). Theseus and his mother Aethra (Anne Day-Jones) are considered as outcasts as he is the product of Aethra being raped. They are forced to stay behind by soldiers from Athens including Lysander (Joseph Morgan). Theseus beats off multiple opponents until the Athenian officer Helios (Peter Stebbings) has Lysander dismissed for his actions. Lysander travels to Hyperion offering him his service the location of the village. The king accepts but labels Lysander a traitor and, to punish him, has his testicles hammered, so he is unable to produce children. Hyperion's soldiers attack the village and, after murdering Aethra and the villagers, take Theseus captive.

It is revealed that the old man in Zeus (Luke Evans). He warns his fellows gods Athena (Isabel Lucas), Poseidon (Kellan Lutz), Ares (Daniel Sharman), Heracles (Steve Byers) and Apollo (Corey Sevier) not to interfere with mortal affairs unless the Titans are freed and they must have faith in the humans to defeat Hyperion.

Theseus is enslaved alongside the thief Stavros (Stephen Dorff). Phaedra, who is being held prisoner nearby, sees a vision of Theseus and organizes a riot, and Theseus uses the chaos to escape with Stavros and the other slaves. Theseus attempts to pursue Hyperion by hijacking a boat, but he and his allies are attacked by Hyperion's soldiers. Poseidon deliberately disobeys Zeus by diving into the sea from Olympus and causing a tidal wave which drowns Hyperion's men. When Phaedra sees a vision of Theseus standing near a shrouded corpse, she determines he must return to bury his mother. 




