Wrath of the Titans

Wrath of the Titans is a 2012 American-British-Spanish fantasy-adventure film directed by Jonathan Liebesman. It is a sequel to Clash of the Titans, and stars Sam Worthington, Liam Neeson, Rosamund Pike, Ralph Fiennes, Édgar Ramírez, Toby Kebell and Bill Nighy. The film takes place ten years after the events of the first film and involves Perseus battling to save Zeus-who is being held captive in the Underworld-as well as defeat the Titans (who have broken free from Tartarus thanks to the gods losing control of them while their immortality is draining) and save mankind. Like its predecessor it gained poor critical reviews, but was commercially successful. A sequel called "Revenge of the Titans" was in production but later scrapped.

Ten years after battling the Kraken, Perseus (Sam Worthington) lives a simple life as a widower fisherman raising his son Helius (John Bell). Zeus (Liam Neeson) visits Perseus, asking for help, revealing that Kronos, the leader of the Titans, is escaping from the Underworld and the walls of Tartarus-where the Titans are imprisoned-are crumbling thanks to humanity's lack of prayers which is also causing the gods' immortality to drain. Perseus declines, valuing his family's safety. 

Zeus travels to the underworld where he meets his brothers Hades (Ralph Fiennes) and Poseidon (Danny Huston) and son Ares (Édgar Ramírez). He asks for Hades' help in rebuilding the walls of Tartarus, but he rejects the offer and attacks Zeus. Ares betrays his father, imprisons him and steals his thunderbolt. Hades and Ares plan to make a deal with Kronos: they will drain Zeus's divine power to revive him in exchange for remaining immortal. The walls of Tartarus crumble and the Titans are unleashed.

After battling a chimera which attacked his village, Perseus travels to the underworld to meet Zeus. He instead discovers Poseidon, who is severely wounded and, after informing of the circumstances, tells Perseus to find his demigod son Agenor (Toby Kebbell), who will lead him to the blacksmith god Hephaestus (Bill Nighy). Poseidon gives Perseus his trident and dies of his injuries, crumbling into dust. 

Perseus, Andromeda (Rosamund Pike) and Agenor travel to a hidden island to find Hephaestus. Agenor explains that Hephaestus the weapons that Zeus, Poseidon and Hades use; the thunderbolt, trident and pitchfork and these weapons can form the Spear of Trium, which can destroy Kronos. 


