Francesco Filippini

Francesco Filippini (18 September 1853 – 6 March 1895) was an Italian painter from Lombardy. Francesco Filippini has been considered a historic painter with a great international importance since 1956.

Filippini was born in Brescia, in Lombardy in northern Italy, on 18 September 1853, into a poor family. His father Lorenzo was a carpenter, his mother Silvia Signoria a seamstress. He was soon sent to work, first as a apprentice in a pastry-shop "Pasticceria Chiappa". He reveals his artistic talent from an early age. At thirteen, in his spare time by heart, he paints with coal Pastry firewood, on wrapping paper, the portraits of the bakery owner and his family. Later, thanks to its beautiful calligraphy, start to work as a clerk to a notary public.

Filippini attended the school of drawing at the Pinacoteca Tosio; from 1872 he received a grant from the city council to continue these studies. In 1875 he received an allowance to study under Giuseppe Bertini in Milan. In 1879 another grant allowed him to travel to Paris to visit the Salon.

Filippini exhibited at the annual shows of the Accademia di Belle Arti di Brera in Milan from 1879, and from 1880 lived in that city. He made his living by teaching, both in schools and privately. He was made an honorary member of the Accademia di Brera in 1878.

In October 1875, together with a friend and colleague Luigi Lombardi, he received an annual stipend of 750 italian Lire and entered Brera Academy of Arts in Milan, where he studied under Giuseppe Bertini. During his studies, Francesco Filippini became close friends with Leonardo Bistolfi and Oreste Silvestri. Together, they become aware of new artistic movements, in particular with Tranquillo Cremona, founder of Scapigliatura style, which has had a great influence on his future work. During this time he wrote mainly portraits and paintings on historical subjects.

In 1876 in Brescia with the painting "Nude in Art Studio" () Francesco Filippini won the competition Camillo Brozzoni Prize. In 1878 he won again this competition with a new painting "Nude in Art Studio" (), and received a three-year scholarship of 1,500 lire for an internship in the workshops of recognized painters in Rome and Paris.

In the summer of 1879, together with the artists Mosè Bianchi, Eugenio Gignous, Roberto Venturi, Francesco Filippini visited the annual exhibition of the Grand Salon of the Louvre in Paris. He was not impressed with the research of impressionist and he turned out to be close to the style of late romanticism.

Back in Milan, in September 1879, he presented to the competition Camillo Brozzoni his new job, "Fulvia says Cicero on Catiline conspiracy" (). The picture was painted by him under the strong influence of art of the same Tranquillo Cremona. For this reason, some members of the jury announced the work is not mature enough and removed the canvas from the competition. Very disappointed he decided to leave the permanently occupation of painting and tried to enter in the service of the financial police, which was not accepted due to health problems.

Nevertheless, he continued to participate at the annual shows exhibition of the Accademia di Belle Arti di Brera. In 1880, the city of Brescia acquired his painting "The Death of Caligula" (). In November of the same year Francesco Filippini won again the competition Camillo Brozzoni Price, with the painting "Fra Angelico on his knees writes image of the Mother of God" (), or "The cell blessed Angelica" (). The location of the work is unknown.

The Painter signing works in the bottom right, in italics, usually in red and embossed.

In 1880 the artist moved permanently to Milan where he start to living with giving private lessons in drawing and teaching at the convent school. In the same year he joined the movement Scapigliatura, whose members were young writers, composers and artists. His paintings of this period are written in the style of naturalism of lombardy style. This is primarily landscapes, scenes from the life of the villagers, and, rarely, portraits. In 1881, Francesco Filippini gave hometown is one of his most famous paintings "Evening in Val Trompia" (1881) (), now kept in the Art and History Municipal Museum of Brescia. This paint won another competition Camillo Brozzoni in 1881.

His works are in museums of Brera Academy, Galleria d'Arte Moderna (Milan), Art collection of Fondazione Cariplo, Milan, Museo di Santa Giulia, Brescia, Civici Musei d'Arte e storia, Brescia, Pinacoteca Tosio Martinengo, Brescia.
When young, Filipinni painted was mostly religious or historical subjects, as well as some portraits. In later life he painted mostly landscapes – of the Apennines, of Pegli, of Porto Valtravaglia, of the Val Camonica or of the Valle Seriana – or seascapes in Chioggia, Genova, Naples or Venice. His work shows the influence of the Scapigliatura painter Tranquillo Cremona.


