Aubusson, Creuse

Aubusson (Occitan auvergnat: "Le Buçon", formerly "Aubuçon") is a commune of the Creuse department in central France, in the Nouvelle-Aquitaine region.

In 1790, when the departments were created, Aubusson was named as district of the Creuse department and an "arrondissement" in 1800.

The "commune" of Aubusson is in the southern part of the department, at the confluence of the Creuse river and its tributary the Beauze river. The city is at the northeastern end of the Millevaches plateau.

It has an area of , and its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is .

The city of Aubusson is at about from Bordeaux, at from Toulouse, at from Paris and at from Lyon.

The "communes" that are around Aubusson are Blessac, Alleyrat, Saint-Maixant, Saint-Amand, Saint-Alpinien , Saint-Pardoux-le-Neuf, Moutier-Rozeille, Saint-Quentin-la-Chabanne and Saint-Marc-à-Frongier.
Aubusson has an oceanic climate with relatively hot summers, mild winters and abundant rainfall, Cfb in the Köppen climate classification.

The inhabitants of Aubusson are known, in French, as "Aubussonnais" (women: "Aubussonnaises").

The "commune" of Aubusson has a population, in 2014, of 3,591; its population density is of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Aubusson

Aubusson forms the urban area of Aubusson with a population of 3,679 inhabitants (2013) and an area of . This urban area is the centre of the metropolitan area of Aubusson, formed by 9 "communes" with a population of 6,386 inhabitants and an area of .

Aubusson is the subprefecture of the Creuse department, the capital of the "arrondissement" of Aubusson and the administrative centre () of the canton of Aubusson, with 9,437 inhabitants .

It is part of the intercommunality "Creuse Grand Sud" ().

Aubusson is well known for its tapestry and carpets, which have been famous throughout the world since the 14th century. Its origins were born with the arrival of weavers from Flanders, who moved to Aubusson around 1580. There is a famous collection of Aubusson tapestries at Vallon-Pont-d'Arc.




