Kshetri

Kshetri or Chhetri () are group of people belonging to Kshatriya caste in Khas group, an Indo-Aryan ethno-linguistic group. Generally, the Parvate/Pahari (hilly) Kshatriyas are called as Kshetris or Khas Kshetris. Many historians called Kshetris as Khas Rajputs. Kshetris served as rulers, administrators, governors and warriors as per their caste. They were able to dominate most of the Nepalese history through monopolizing government and military upto 1951 AD. After democracy in Nepal, Kshetris were still visible in the government especially dominating Panchayati government and still monopolizing military.

According to 1854 "Muluki Ain" (Legal Code) of Nepal, Kshetris belong to "sacred thread bearers" (Yagyopavit) and "twice born" (Dvija) Hindus.

They are descended from old warriors of Khas Kingdom. Chhetri dominated the military forces of Shah dynasty of Nepal. The 5 main Chhetri families at Royal court of Nepal formed group called Kaji Khalak (Aristocrats). They are; Basnyat, Pande, Thapa, Kunwar and Bista. Basnyat, Pande and Thapas were most powerful Chhetri groups led by Shivaram Singh Basnyat, Kalu Pande and Birbhadra Thapa at the Unification of Nepal. The Kunwars were led by Ramkrishna Kunwar and Bista/Bisht were led by Gajabal Bista and Atibal Bista. Sometimes, Bhandari Kshetri family of Jaswanta Bhandari was also considered as Kaji Khalak of the Royal court of Nepal.
In the court struggle for power, Pande Khalaks and Thapa Khalaks were fierce opponents. They often opposed each other. Pandes were supported by Basnyats due to blood relations. Thapas were supported by Kunwars due to blood relations. In the end, Kunwars betrayed Thapa groups by murdering the Thapa leader Mathabar Singh Thapa. That caused Kunwars to rise to power and all Kshetris were thrown of power. The Kunwar high rank officers escalated quickly between 1841 AD to 1854 AD.Kunwars claimed royalty and changed their surname to "Rana" (meaning: King) from "Kunwar" (meaning: Prince). In 1951AD, democracy was established and Kshetri rule were stopped.
Adhikari, Bagale, Baruwal, Basnyat/Basnet, Bhandari, Bista/Bisht, Budha, Budhathoki, Chauhan, Chhetri, Chiluwal, Deuja, Godar, Kalikote, Karki, Katawal, Kadayat, Kathayat, Khadka, Khatri/Khatri Chhetri (K.C.), Khulal, Kshetri, Kunwar, Mahat, Mahatara, Marhattha, Pande, Punwar, Rana, Ranabhat, Rathor, Raut/Rawat, Rawal, Rayamajhi, Rokaya/Rokka, Silwal, Suyal, Tandon, Thapa, etc.


