Ashley Greene

Ashley Michele Greene (born February 21, 1987) is an American actress and model. She is best known for playing Alice Cullen in the Twilight Saga films.

Greene was born in Jacksonville, Florida. Her mother is Michele Greene (née Tatum), who works in insurance, and Joe Greene, a former U.S. Marine who now owns a concrete business. She grew up in Middleburg and Jacksonville. She moved to Los Angeles, California, at the age of 17 to pursue an acting career. Greene has an older brother named Joe.

At first, she planned to become a model. However, her manager told her that she was not tall enough to be a fashion model and that she should act in commercials instead. After taking commercial and acting classes, she realized that she liked acting more than modeling. Greene graduated from high school early and moved to L.A. to start her acting career.

Early in her career, she had guest roles on television programs, such as "Punk'd" and "Crossing Jordan". In 2008, she had an important role in the movie "Twilight", which was based on the novel of the same name by Stephenie Meyer. She played the character Alice Cullen. She was also in the sequels to "Twilight": "" (2009), "" (2010), "" (2011), and '" (2012).

Greene played Michelle Burkham in the drama movie "Skateland" (2010).

She acted in the movie "A Warrior's Heart" with Kellan Lutz, who was also in "Twilight".

Greene acted along with Miley Cyrus and Demi Moore in the drama movie "LOL" (2012).

In 2013, Greene was in the historical film "CBGB" about the former Manhattan music club with the same name.

In 2010, Greene did modeling for an advertisement by the company SoBe. In this advertisement, she wore body paint. Later the same year, Greene became the main model for the Mark brand of cosmetics. This brand is made by the company Avon.

Greene received an award from the PETA foundation because of her work with Avon, which does not do animal testing. She also received the "The Style Icon Award" from the magazine "Hollywood Life" at the Young Hollywood Awards.



