Cracked nipples

Cracked nipples that happens when a mother breastfeeds her infant. This can happen for many reasons. When a mother gets cracked nipples it can be very painful. The nipples can be in sore, dry, chapped or bleeding. When the baby is breastfeeding the cracked nipple can cause great pain. Many times this severe pain will make the mother stop breastfeeding.The crack looks like a cut across the tip of the nipple. Cracked nipples can sometimes be treated.
The nipple is not only the part of the breast that helps nourish the infant. Small glands surround the nipple to keep the skin soft. These are called Montgomery glands. Cracked nipples usually just happen to breastfeeding mothers. Sometimes a sore will form. Cracked nipples are a skin condition that is caused by damage or trauma to the nipple. Often, cracked nipples can be seen three to seven days after the birth. If a nipple appears to be in the shape of a wedge or it looks white and flat this can mean that the nipple will form cracks.

American studies show that cracked nipples are from the wrong latching-on by the baby. Other reasons for having cracked nipples exist. These are using a feeding bottle and breast engorgement. The baby may be in a poor position or the mother may not have much experience breastfeeding a baby. Sometimes the nipples are the wrong shape or are pointed in. (This can be fixed.) Sometimes if a nipple is a light color the baby may have trouble finding it. If a mother uses a breast pump this will make the breast fill up and change the shape of the nipple. When a nipple becomes flat, the baby has a hard time getting it into his or her mouth. When the breast gets very full of milk the shape of the breast will change. The breast will be hard, flat and swollen.making the breast inflexible, flat, hard, and swollen. The nipples on an full breast are flat.

When the baby is latched on well, the nipple goes into the soft part of the baby's mouth. This is in the back of the mouth and is called the soft palate. If the nipple goes into the front of the baby's mouth it will be pinched against the hard part of the baby's mouth. This is called the hard palate. When the nipple is in the front part of the baby's mouth, the nipples can crack and cause great pain. The baby can make cracked nipples because it can suck very hard. This stretches and pulls the nipple. When the nipple rubs inside and against the skin and toungue of the baby's mouth, the nipple can get hurt. An infection can cause cracked nipples. A type of yeast can cause a skin infection on the nipple. This is called a Candida infection. It can also happen in the baby's mouth. The infection in the baby's mouth is called thrush. It looks like clumps of milk stuck on the baby's tongue. But thrush cannot be wiped off the baby's tongue without irritation. Thrush can happen if the baby has taken antiboitic medicine. 

If a mother has had her first baby, it may take a few tries to get the baby to attach well. A good attachment prevents cracked nipples. If the nipples become cracked or bleed, the latch may need to be corrected. Breastfeeding should not stop if a mother has cracked nipples. Breastfeeding will help the nipples heal. A little breast milk or purified lanolin cream or ointment helps the healing process. 

If a baby bottle is used and breastfeeding is done at the same time this may cause cracked nipples. This is because different sucking techniques are required for the bottle and the breast. Bottle-feeding babies suck hard on the bottle. Breasfeeding babies use a different way to suck on the breast that is more gentle. Using a bottle makes the baby want to breastfeed as much.

Infection can enter the breast through cracked nipples. Bacteria can get in the breast through the cracks. This is called mastitis. Breastmilk protects the baby from infection. Breastmilk does not protect the mother from infection. A breast feeding mother can become infected by a Candida infection (thrush). She can then have deep-pink, cracked, and sore nipples. Mothers with hepatitis B and cracked nipples can breastfeed. There are other infections that the mother can have that can be given to the baby through the cracked nipples. One of this infections that can be given to a baby is called Toxoplasmosis. Transmission risk of HIV can happen if the mother has cracked and bleeding nipples There is a rare infection called Chagas disease, can be given to the breastfeeding infant through cracked nipples. Women with hepatitis C may infect their infants while breastfeeding with cracked nipples.

Cracked nipples can be treated with 100% lanolin. Glycerin nipple pads can be chilled and put over the nipples to help them heal. If the cause of cracked nipples is from thrush, treatment is usually with nystatin. If the mother is and the baby have a yeast infection then they can be treated at the same time. Breasting helps the nipples heal. A little breast milk or purified lanolin cream or ointment on the cracked nipples helps the nipples to heal. There are medical people who can help a woman with breastfeeding. They are nurses, midwives and lactation consultants.

Some things don't help to cure cracked nipples. These things are using a nipple guard and keeping the breastfeeding short. If the baby only nurses for a short time, then the baby may not get enough milk.

The nipples of mothers are protected by the body'w own skin oil to prevent drying, cracking, or infections. Cracked nipples may be prevented by these things:


Roman chamomile can be be used directly on to the skin for pain and swelling and is used to treat cracked nipples.

Many mothers get cracked nipples. The women in New York City were asked why they stopped breastfeeding. Up to 35% of nursing mothers stopped breastfeeding after one week because of the pain of cracked nipples. Thirty percent stopped breastfeeding between weeks one and three. Mothers in Brazil said that they would also stop breastfeeding when they have cracked nipples. Mothers with higher education levels are more likely to continue breastfeeding even if they have the pain of cracked nipples. Mothers in the UK said they stopped breastfeeding because the cracked nipples made it too painful.



