Sergio Basso

Sergio Basso (Milan, June 11, 1975)  is an Italian movie director, writer and scriptwriter.

Sergio Basso’s passion for cinema dates back to his high school years. He spent several years in China. Beginning in 1996 he studied oriental art. Basso graduated from the University of Venice in 1999 with a degree in oriental languages. He also received a degree in Classics at the University of Milan in 2011. He graduated from Centro Sperimentale di Cinematografia in Rome in 2006. He is a member of the 'European Documentary Network Association'. He has attended seminars at the GITIS Moscow Theatre School.

Basso began working in theater as a director for the Teatraz company. He then moved on to the movie industry. Basso spent two years as an assistant director on the set of Italian director Gianni Amelio’s" The Missing Star". He directed a number of documentaries. Some of these were presented at the Festivals of Nyon, Annecy, Turin and San Francisco.

In 2013, Basso directed the movie "Amori elementari". It was released in movie theaters across Italy, Switzerland, Russia and Canada. The movie was premiered at the 36th Moscow International Film Festival. It also was shown at the 65th Giffoni Film Festival, the Rio International Film Festival, and at the 'Ostrajenie Film Festival in Moscow. It won the Grand Prix for Best Children Movie in Moscow. 

In 2014, Basso directed a documentary on China’s Han dynasty. It was commissioned by the Chinese state television network CCTV-6.

Basso created one of the first Italian cross-media platforms, the documentary Giallo a Milano. It has new stories and characters that had first appeared in the documentary film of the same name. He has been collaborating with Italy’s national public broadcasting company RAI. He has made several cartoons for them. Per l'animazione di uno dei personaggi di "Giallo a Milano" vince Il Festival Internazionale d'Animazione Annecy nel 2010. Si occupa anche di cinematografia d'impresa, realizzando cortometraggi e reportage per Telecom, Save the Children, ONU, il museo MAXXI di Roma, De Agostini Editore. In 2010, Basso won the International Festival of Animation Annecy. This was for his animation work for one of the characters of "Giallo a Milano". He has also made commercials. He has worked on campaigns for Telecom, Save the Children, the United Nations. He has also worked for the museum MAXXI Roma, and De Agostini Editore.






