Sausage Party

Sausage Party is a 2016 American adult 3D computer animated adventure and comedy movie. It was a spoof of Disney and Pixar movies.

The story is of a sausage named Frank. He has dreams of living with his hot dog bun girlfriend, Brenda.

When Frank and Brenda's packages are chosen by a woman named Camille Toh to leave a supermarket called Shopwell's, a returned jar of Bickle's honey mustard tries to warn the groceries that the Great Beyond is a lie. But nobody listens except Frank. Honey Mustard then calls on Frank to seek out a bottle of liquor named Firewater. Honey Mustard throws himself to his death. This causes an accidental cart crash that makes Brenda, Frank and several other groceries to fall out; that includes a douche who gets his nozzle bent. The douche plots revenge against Frank and Brenda.

Teresa, a taco, falls in love with Brenda right after meeting her.

Meanwhile, at Camille's home, Frank's friends Barry and Carl are scared as they see the other purchased foods being cooked and eaten by Camille. Barry and Carl attempt to escape from a window. However, only Barry is successful; Carl is sliced in half by Camille. 

When Frank separates from his friends, who disapprove of him being skeptical of the Great Beyond, he finds a cookbook behind the freezer section and reveals its contents to the rest of Shopwell's groceries. Initially panicking, the groceries choose to not believe Frank out of fear of losing their sense of purpose.

The movie was given an NC-17 rating by the MPAA due to the visibility of pubic hair. The pubic hair was then removed. The movie got an R-rating for strong crude sexual content, explicit language and drug use.

The movie was released in the United States on Friday, August 12, 2016. 

"Sausage Party" took in $97.7 million in North America and $42.8 million in other countries. The total take-in was $140.4 million, against a budget of $19 million. 

The movie has an 82% rating by Rotten Tomatoes, meaning good reviews.


