Yu Guang Zhong

Yu Guang Zhong (余光中.b. 1928) is a Taiwanese poet, writer and educator. Yu Kuang Zhong was a professor of National Sun Yat-Sen University and National Kaohsiung First University of Science and Technology. He was National Sun Yat-sen University’ Dean. Yu Guang Zhong was the English department associate professor in Michigan State University. In his early life, he was the member of “藍星詩社”, Blue Star Poetry Club. He lives in Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Yu Guang Zhong was born in Nanjing in China on October 21, 1928 (September 9, 1928 in lunar calendar). He calls himself as the son of Dogwood, a planet which is used to be the symbol of Double Ninth Festival, because of his birthday is on Double Ninth Festival which is very important
festival for Chinese people to worship ancestors. Yu Guang Zhong lived in Nanjing with his family in his childhood. Then he fled with his family in China because of Japanese invading force in 1947. Japanese army invaded China and tried to occupy China as their colony. Yu’s family started the life of fleeing from cities to cities in China. Then, Yu went to Taiwan to study in National Normal Taiwan University in 1950 and graduated from there.

In 1954, Yu Guang Zhong established Blue Star Poetry Club in Taiwan. In 1957, he delivered the lectures in English in National Normal Taiwan University and translated Irving’s Stone’s Lust for Life and Ernest Hemingway’s The Old Man and the Sea into Chinese. In 1959, he received the master degree of Art in The University of Iowa.
He came back to Taiwan and become the lecturer in National Normal Taiwan University. Yu Guang Zhong was invited to be a professor by United States Department of State for one year to deliver lectures after he published the poetry collection, “蓮的聯想(liǎn de liánxiǎng)[Lotus Association].” For his contribution to Taiwanese culture Taiwanese, Taiwanese President Ma Ying-Jeou awarded the Order of Brilliant Star to Yu in 2015.

Yu’s thoughts were influenced by western thoughts due to his study of the art in America. At that time, Yu was also influenced by modern music. Due to the broken relationship with the United States, Taiwanese young people lost their life direction and they accepted all information from America without filtering it. In the same time, Yu found that rock music was a common sense between Taiwan and American. In 1974, he published the poem to express his feeling of creating the poem. In the meantime, the local singer, Yang Xuan composed Yu’s poem, “Four Rhymes of Nostalgia”, as a song. This new style which combined with poem and Chinese folk song became a hit. The most important thing is that this new style of poem and music influenced next generation’s.
Academic music creators did not thought that this kind of style fit on Modern Chinese folk song aesthetic. Non-academic music creator thought that there were too many format limitations which could not make the folk song more common. Besides, this situation will destroy the development of expanding and creating new style’s poem. 



