Panaro

The Panaro () is a river of northeastern Italy, the last important right tributary of the Po river. It starts in the Northern Apennines mountain range and flows through the Emilia-Romagna region.

The Panaro river has a length of , and a drainage basin with an area of approximately .

The Panaro river, with the name "Rio delle Tagliole", starts in the northern Apennines where Emilia-Romagna meets Tuscany, in the place called "Foce a Giovo" near the Monte Cimone.

From here it flows to the northeast down the valley. At Pievepelago (in the Modena province), its name changes to Scoltenna. Finally, the name is changed to Panaro after the confluence of the Scoltena and the "Leo" stream in the Montespecchio valley, Pavullo nel Frignano.

It borders the "Parco regionale dei Sassi di Roccamalatina" ("Regional Park of the Sassi di Roccamalatina") and keeps flowing to the north. South of Modena, in "Ponte Guerro", it is joined by the "Guerro" stream and in "Fossalta", a place to the east of Modena, it is joined, as a left tributary, by the "Tiepido" stream, its main tributary.

At Bomporto, the river joins the "Naviglio de Modena" ("Modena canal or waterway") and can be navigated until its confluence with the Po, on the border with the Veneto region and to the west of Ferrara.

The Panaro river flows through the cities of Vignola, Finale Emilia and Bondeno and just to the east of Modena.

Of historical and artistic interest is the bridge of Olina (), built in 1522 across the river (still called Scoltenna) near the town of the same name, in the commune of Pavullo nel Frignano

The Panaro flows mainly through the province of Modena but it also flows for a short distance in the Ferrara province after Finale Emilia. It flows through several comunes; some of them, all in the Modena province, Emilia-Romagna region, are:

The tributaries of the Panaro river are small streams; the most importants are the Guerro () and the Tiepido (); they join the Panaro from the left side.




