Mariano Taccola

Mariano di Jacopo detto il Taccola (1381 – ca. 1453), called Taccola (the crow), was an Italian artist, engineer and administrator. He lived during the early Renaissance period. He wrote two important books, "De ingeneis" and "De machinis". These hand-drawn books have drawings of many new (for his time) machines. There are also descriptions of the machines. Leonardo da Vinci and other people used his books in the later Renaissance.

Mariano Taccola was born in Siena in 1381. His father was a wine merchant named Jacopo. His mother's name was Madonna Nofria (Bacci). The name he was given at his baptism was Mariano Daniello. Taccola himself used the name Ser Mariani Jacobi decti. He had many different jobs. Records show Taccola had been a wood carver who made church ornaments. He was a public official, a secretary to a hospital. Taccola was also a sculptor and an engineer. Most of the details about his life come from his books. Taccola started his first book, "De ingeneis", in 1419. He completed it in 1433. The book probably led to his being appointed supervisor of roads and hydraulic engineering. He retired from this position sometime in the 1440s. Taccola's second book, "De machinis", appeared in 1449. It contained updated drawings from "De ingeneis" as well as many new drawings. It appears he lived in Siena his entire life. Taccola received a pension from the city for his administrative work. In 1453 he stopped receiving his pension meaning he may have died that year. But in another document dated 1453 he wrote he had become a friar in the "Order of San Jacomo". 

Taccola was one of the first artist-engineers of the Renaissance. He invented a new way of making technical drawings. This is called an exploded-view. In these diagrams, an object's parts are shown separated and with indications of how they fit together. After Taccola died, his work was largely neglected until the 20th century. Only after 1960 were his works printed. This was based on the discovery of his original works in two museums. These originals were much better than copies, which scholars had been familiar with. Now their importance is more widely recognized. 

Taccola was familiar with several sienese artists and architects. Jacopo della Quercia was his daughter's godfather. He once interviewed the Florentine architect Filippo Brunelleschi and recorded it in one of his folios. Brunelleschi advised Taccola not to explain his inventions to others who did not understand machines. He said: "Therefore the gifts given to us by God must not be relinquished to those who speak ill of them and who are moved by envy or ignorance. To disclose too much of one's inventions and achievements is one and the same thing as to give up the fruit of one's ingenuity... the ignorant and inexperienced understand nothing, not even when things are explained to them; their ignorance moves them promptly to anger; they remain in their ignorance because they want to show themselves learned, which they are not"

(This edition reproduces Books III and IV of de Ingeneis)
(This edition also reproduces Books III and IV of de Ingeneis)




