Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon?

Iss Pyaar Ko Kya Naam Doon? (""; ) is an Indian soap opera. It is shown during the daytime on weekdays, on Star Plus. It originally ran from 6 June 2011 until 30 November 2012. The show is mainly about the romance between Arnav Singh Raizada (Barun Sobti) and Khushi Kumari Gupta (Sanaya Irani).

The series is done in Hindi. The actors' voices have been recorded over (dubbing) in Tamil (as "Idhu Kadhala"), Telugu (as "Chuppulu Kalisina Shubhavela"), Malayalam (as "Mounam Sammadham"), Turkish (as "Bir Garip Ask") and Arabic (as "Men Nazra Thanya").

The show stopped being made in 2012. This was because Sobti, who plays the main character, quit the show. Three years later, in November 2015, a web series of eight episodes was released. It continued the story, and Sobti returned to play Arnav. The web series was successful. Because of its success, the television series was renewed for another 30 episodes. It is to be shown on Star Plus in March 2016.

For his role as Arnav, Sobti won "Favorite TV Drama Actor" at the People's Choice Awards in 2012, and "Best Actor Popular" at the Indian Television Academy Awards in 2012. Sobti and Irani also won the Indian Telly Award for "Best Onscreen Couple" in 2012.

Arnav Singh Raizada (Barun Sobti) is a successful businessman in India. He is the owner of AR Designs. He is popularly known as ASR in the business world. He is ruthless and egoistic though sophisticated in his behaviour. He believes that money is the most important thing in the world. He is an atheist and does not believe in rituals, customs and traditions. He does not believe in marriage and wanted to maintain a living relationship with his ex-girlfriend Lavanya Kashyap. Besides this, he loves his elder sister Anjali (Daljeet Kaur Bhanot) and respects his elders. He suffers from diabetes from an early age. He has hobbies of planting and gardening. However his arrogant and ruthless attitude changes when he falls in love with Khushi Kumari Gupta (Sanaya Irani).

Khushi is hired as Arnav's assistant. She is a simple, traditional girl. She is also an orphan, but she believes in the power of love and maintains a strong faith in God. Despite their differences, they are attracted to each other. They eventually get married.



