Saint-Dizier

Saint-Dizier is a commune of France, and a subprefecture of the Haute-Marne department in the Grand Est region.

The city of Saint-Dizier is on the northern part of the Haute-Marne department in northeast France near the Meuse and the Marne departments.

It has an area of . Its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is .

The "commune" of Saint-Dizier is surrounded by the "communes" Trois-Fontaines-l'Abbaye, Chancenay, Bettancourt-la-Ferrée, Ancerville (Meuse department), Chamouilley, Eurville-Bienville, Troisfontaines-la-Ville, Humbécourt, Laneuville-au-Pont, Moëslains, Valcourt, Hallignicourt and Villiers-en-Lieu.

Two rivers flow through the city: the "Ornel" and the Marne. The city is at about from "Lac du Der-Chantecoq", the largest man-made lake of Western Europe.

The Köppen climate classification type for the climate at Saint-Dizier is a "Marine West Coast Climate" and of the subtype "Cfb". The average amount of precipitation for the year is and the average temperature for the year is .

The inhabitants of Saint-Dizier are known, in French, as "Bragards" (women: "Bragardes") or "Bragars" (women: "Bragares").

The city of Saint-Dizier has a population, in 2014, of 25,505; it is the "commune" of Haute-Marne with more people living in it, even more than Chaumont (22,560 inhabitants) that is the prefecture of the department. Its population density is of inhabitants/km.

Evolution of the population in Saint-Dizier

Saint-Dizier forms, with other five "communes", the urban area of Saint-Dizier with a population of 32,086 inhabitants (2014) and an area of . This urban area is the centre of the metropolitan area of Saint-Diziert, formed by 43 "communes", with a population of 53,790 inhabitants (2014) and an area of .

Saint-Dizier is a subprefecture of the Haute-Marne department, the capital of the "arrondissement" of Saint-Dizier and the administrative centre () of three cantons:

It is part of the intercommunality "Saint-Dizier, Der et Blaise" ().




