Chisholm v. Georgia

Chisholm v. Georgia, , is considered the first great decision by the United States Supreme Court. Given its early date, there was little available legal precedent in American law. It was almost immediately superseded by the Eleventh Amendment.

In 1777, needed supplies for the Revolutionary War were purchased from a South Carolina businessman by the Executive Council of Georgia. The supplies were delivered but Georgia never paid as they had promised. After the businessman's death, Alexander Chisholm, the executor of his estate, took the case to court trying to collect from the state of Georgia. Georgia maintained it was not under the jurisdiction of the federal courts. 

United States Attorney General Edmund Randolph argued the case for the plaintiff before the court. The defendant, Georgia, refused to appear, claiming that, as a sovereign state, it could not be sued without granting its consent to the suit.

In a four to one decision, the court ruled in favor of the plaintiff, with Chief Justice John Jay and associate justices John Blair, James Wilson, and William Cushing constituting the majority. Only Justice Iredell dissented. The court ruled that did not allow the states' sovereign immunity. In short, the Court ruled that Georgia was subject to the jurisdiction of the U.S. Supreme Court. It granted federal courts the power to hear disputes between private citizens and states.

The resulting public sentiment in favor of states' rights led directly to the passage of the Eleventh Amendment in 1795. In "Hollingsworth v. Virginia" (1798), the court ruled that pending court actions from "Chisholm" were dismissed due to passage of the Eleventh Amendment. This removed federal jurisdiction in cases where citizens of one state or of foreign countries attempt to sue another state.

"Chisholm" is one of only four decisions by the Supreme Court that were overturned by an amendment to the United States Constitution. The other three are:

Arguably, one more case could be added:


