Star Wars: Clone Wars (TV series)

Star Wars: The Clone Wars is an American computer-animated television series created by George Lucas and by Lucasfilm and Lucasfilm Animation set during from Three Months after the Battle of Geonosis and before Revenge of the Sith when Anakin turns evil. The series became very popular around the world on Cartoon Network as U.S Cartoon Network owned rights for season 1-5 but as season 6 was relicenced to Netflix in U.S and Canada. Disney had cancelled the show due to want more of Star Wars Episode 7 and Star Wars Rebels but in September 7 2014 on star wars.com a story arc with rough animation reel was the unreleased episodes due to cancellation and Star Wars Son of Dathomir was turned in to a comic book and another one will come with Asajj Ventress in June 2015.

The Clone Wars has begin as the Jedi Knights struggle to maintain peace in the galaxy and are forced to lead the Clone army of the republic against the evil droids army of the Sith lead by Count Dooku, General Grievous and other villians.

The series was spinoff the 2D cartoon series made to a 3D series. George Lucas (executive producer) had first the idea as wanting to make a series based on the clone wars. George Lucas intended to make 100 episodes in five seasons.
Lucasfilm had Originally produced 100 episodes divided in 5 seasons but Dave Filoni had confirmed on his facebook a sixth season coming in Early 2014 on Netflix and a sixith season came with 11 episodes but there were still unfinished episodes and story arcs so the Clone Wars Legacy had a unreleased rought animatic story arc on starwars.com and turned in to comic books and novels. 
The series airs on Cartoon Network U.S and Cartoon Network Worldwide. First in U.S in 2008. Netflix had obtained rights for season six.

The seasons of the show was made in DVD released in volumes as Season Two Volume titled Commando Commanders. DVD called Return of Darth Maul containing Darth Maul return story arc and Asajj Ventress new life. After Season Six came on Netflix the season came on DVD titled "The Lost Missions' 



