The Backyardigans (video game)

The Backyardigans is an Beat-em up game developed by Griptone Games and published by 2K Games. It was first released in North America on May 1, 2005 and in Europe on May 29, 2005 for the Xbox, PlayStation 2, Nintendo GameCube and Nintendo DS. A Game Boy Advance version was later released on June 5, 2005 in North America, and on June 24, 2005 in Europe. The game features the two-player cooperative mode and six missions. Unlike the former Splashinis games, the game is the first Backyardigans video game ever made. Unlike the former Splashinis games, the game was not released in Japan. A PlayStation Portable version was planned, but was cancelled. This is also the first Backayrdigans video game to be rated E10+ instead of E, and the first and only Backyardigans video game to be released for the five platforms, except for Nintendo DS, which released his latest game ever made for 2K Play. A sequel, The Backyardigans 2, is scheduled to be released for the Xbox One and PlayStation 4, on May 1, 2018. 

The game features 29 levels and 6 missions, each abitilies for the backyard friends. The main characters has a special ability weapons, including the high-power resolution weapon. The game has a co-op mode, up to two players. As Mickey says when the white bird flies, the backyard friends must attacking the enemies together. 

When Mickey gets Minnie coins back to say that, the backyard friends has a strong attack. When Goofy has a blue feet to be said Woohoo, the backyard friend has a double jump.

When Dipper and Mabel screams from Gideon Rises during the leaving of Gravity Falls, the backyard friend dies or runs out of lives or health. Players controls The Backyardigans main characters. 

In the Nintendo DS and Game Boy Advance versions, players can used the war of the best selling roles of The Backyardigans. 

Nickelodeon develops his video game based on the series, to be released for the five platforms In Summer 2005, the game was released.

The game is score by Brian McBreatly, best known for the Zimmer Twins and other Splashinis Worldwide Studios production releases. 



