Kharkov National Medical University

Kharkiv National Medical University (KNMU, ) is a medical university in Kharkiv, Ukraine. It was first known as Kharkiv State Medical University and then Kharkiv Medical Institute.

At present, over 700 professors teach at the university. Since 1951, the university has been training medical staff for countries of Eastern Europe, China and Mongolia. Since 1961, it has been training students from other countries of Asia, Africa and Latin America. At present, there are about 3,400 foreign students in the Kharkiv National Medical University who study at the Preparatory Department, Medical, Nursing and Dental Faculties. They do postgraduate and clinical post-graduate (residency) courses as well as professional probation at departments of the university in Dental, therapy, orthopedics, surgery, oncology, psychiatry, ophthalmology, obstetrics and gynecology, as well as other medical specialties. The University has trained over 5,000 specialists for 86 countries in Europe, Asia, Latin America and the Middle East. 

The history of the higher medical school in Kharkiv is more than 200 years long. It is closely connected with the history of University of Kharkiv, because it originated from its Medical Faculty. The University was founded in 1805. A decree about its foundation was signed by the Russian Tsar Alexander I, and the first rules of the university were approved at that time.

The university ranks 481 out of 11,000 universities in the world by 4icu world university ranking. The university takes the 26th general place and the 5th place among higher medical educational establishments of Ukraine in the scientometrical database SCOPUS. It ranks 47th among Ukrainian higher educational establishments by UNESCO Top 200. In 2015, the Order of Honour and Silver Diploma by the rating "Golden Fortune" were awarded to the University. KhNMU became a laureate of the rating of higher educational establishments "Ukraine-2000".

In 2001, Silver Diploma by the VII International Rating "Golden Fortune" in the nomination "The Third Millennium Quality" was awarded to the staff of the University.

In 2010, the University won an honorary title "Leader of Modern Education" at the International Exhibition "Modern Education of Ukraine"; in 2011-2012 – "Leader of National Education" at the International Exhibitions "Education and Career - 2011" and "Education and Career - 2012".

The university has a complex of buildings for teaching. It has 5 hostels. All the students of the graduate and post-graduate stages of training are provided with beds at the hostels.

The university has 65 departments. The departments are equipped with modern classrooms and have all the opportunities for high-quality training of students.


About 40 studies in priority subjects are conducted at the university. These are working out of methods for prevention, diagnosing and treatment of diseases of the cardiovascular, reproductive and musculo-skeletal systems.

The university is a member of the International Association of Universities (an organisation overseen by UNESCO) since 1998. It is on the register of medical universities of the World Health Organization (Avicenna Directories).




