Five Nights at Freddy's (series)

"Five Nights at Freddy's" is a psychological horror series that that began with a game where you see through the eyes of a security guard who works the night shift at "Freddy Fazbear's Pizza". But this is no normal pizzeria because you have to watch the restaurant's four robots over security cameras. The characters are named Freddy Fazbear, Bonnie the Bunny, Chica the Chicken and Foxy the Pirate Fox. A fifth secret animatronic named Golden Freddy can also appear in the game. One of the posters in the cameras shows Freddy's face, but it can change to Golden Freddy's face and he will then appear in your office and crash your game. Throughout the nights, a man gives you instructions over the phone and has been named Phone Guy. According to him all of these robots try to stuff you into a Freddy costume killing you in the process. He says this is because they think you are a robot endoskeleton. To protect yourself, you have the camera which will keep Foxy from moving and Freddy from moving if the camera's on him. If you see them in the doorways on either side of your office, you have to close them but this takes up the building's power which is limited. If your power shuts off Freddy makes his way to the left door and tries to kill you before your shift ends at 6 AM. The goal of each night is to survive until 6 AM. After the fifth night, you unlock a bonus sixth night and after that night, you unlock a custom night where you choose each robot's difficulty.

In "Five Nights at Freddys 2" at a "Freddy Fazbear's Pizza" that predates the one in the original. The restaurant consists of 11 robot characters that are the five original animatronics, Toy Freddy, Toy Bonnie Toy Chica, Mangle, the Puppet and Balloon Boy. Since the animatronics think you're a robot endoskeleton, you use a Freddy mask to protect yourself, but this time there are no doors. Also, the building's power is unlimited but a flashlight is introduced in this game which does not and the flashlight can be used to keep the animatronics in place. Your flashlight, as well as the vent lights on either side of the office, will also be disabled if Balloon Boy comes into your office. Additionally, you keep the puppet out of your office by remotely winding up a music box through one of the cameras.

In "Five Nights at Freddy's 3" you see through the eyes of a security guard at "Fazbear's Fright: the Horror Attraction". In this location only a new character named Springtrap, a yellow version of Bonnie is able to kill you. There are two new ways you can prevent that: closing ventilation systems and playing audio. In this game, Phone Guy is replaced by Phone Dude, but on the second night, Phone Dude begins playing audio tapes he discovered of Phone Guy. These tapes reveal that Springtrap is attracted to audio explaining the new way you can keep Springtrap away. But both of those systems, as well as your camera system, sometimes malfunction and you have to reboot them whenever necessary. If the ventilation malfunctions you may see "phantom" versions of Freddy, Chica, Foxy, Mangle, the puppet and Balloon Boy, but their jumpscares are the first ones in the series that don't kill you. The sixth night is also called "Nightmare" and there is know custom night. 

In "Five Nights at Freddy's 4" you are a young child who is having nightmares about the animatronics. In the first four nights, you have to defend yourself against "nightmare" versions of the four original animatronics by keeping the door's on either side of your room shut. This is where Bonnie and Chica come in. When Foxy gets into your room, he runs into your closet which you also have to check to see how close he is to coming out and killing you. Nightmare plush toys of Freddy will also appear on the bed behind you and if you ignore them for too long, Freddy attacks you. On the fifth night, a nightmare version of Golden Freddy named Nightmare Fredbear replaces all four animatronics. In the sixth and seventh nights (neither of which are custom nights), a black version of Nightmare Fredbear only named "Nightmare" appears. In between nights, you play a minigame that features Plushtrap, a plush toy version of Springtrap. If you beat the minigame, you get to start at 2 A.M. on the next night. In the Halloween edition of the game, three new characters are introduced; Nightmare Balloon Boy (who replaces Plushtrap), Nightmare Mangle (who replaces Nightmare Foxy) and a nightmare version of the puppet named Nightmarionne (who replaces Nightmare). In this game, your flashlight power is unlimited. 

In "Five Nights at Freddy's: Sister Location", you are a technician who works at "Circus Baby's Rentals and Entertainment". The animatronics in this game are "funtime" versions of Freddy and Foxy as well as three new animatronics: Circus Baby, Ballora and Ennard. Instead of trying to survive by keeping these five animatronics out of your office, you move around the location completing tasks given to you by an AI named HandUnit and nights end once these tasks are completed. Three of the animatronics have what might be called minions. Funtime Freddy has Bon-Bon, a hand puppet version of Bonnie, Circus Baby has Bidybabs, and Ballora has Minireenas. There is a downloadable Custom night.

