Donald Trump presidential campaign, 2016

The Donald Trump presidential campaign, 2016 started on June 16, 2015 when businessman Donald Trump announced his candidacy for President of the United States in the 2016 election. Trump has campaigned to be the nominee previously. He made the announcement at a rally in the Trump Tower in New York City.

On November 9, 2016, following the election, Trump was elected President of the United States, while his running mate Mike Pence was elected Vice President of the United States. 

Trump declared, "We are going to make our country great again" and he made a commitment to become the "greatest jobs president." Trump's official campaign slogan is "Make America Great Again." (which was Ronald Reagan's campaign slogan, but Trump trademarked it).

Trump is opposed to illegal immigration and has promised to build a wall on the US-Mexico border, and believes that illegal immigrants already in this country should be deported. He is against the Trans Pacific Partnership trade agreement. Trump also proposed banning Muslims from entering the United States, an idea that many Republicans criticized as unconstitutional. He also supports reforming the tax code.

A survey conducted by "The Economist" / YouGov released July 9, 2015 became significant as the first major nationwide poll to show Trump as the 2016 Republican presidential front-runner. A Suffolk/"USA Today" poll released on July 14, 2015, showed Trump with 17% support among Republican voters, with Jeb Bush at 14%. A "Washington Post"/ABC News poll taken on July 16–19, showed Trump had 24% Republican support, over Scott Walker at 13%. A CNN/ORC poll showed Trump in the lead at 18% support among Republican voters, over Jeb Bush at 15%, and a CBS News poll from August 4 showed Trump with 24% support, Bush second at 13%, and Walker third at 10%.

On May 4, 2016, Trump became the presumptive nominee after his only challengers Texas United States senator Ted Cruz and Governor of Ohio John Kasich dropped out. Trump has been opposed by other Republicans. Several prominent Republican politicians have refused to endorse him, and his candidacy has been protested by many people. 



