Princess Superstar

Concetta Kirschner (born February 25, 1971), better known as Princess Superstar, is an American rapper and DJ. She is best known for her hit songs "Baby Babysitter" (2001) and "Perfect" (2005).

She calls her music "flip-flop" which is a mixture of hip hop and electronica. In summer 2014 she had her reality television show "I Love Princess Superstar" on her YouTube account.

Concetta Kirschner was born on February 25, 1971 in Spanish Harlem, New York City, New York to a Jewish father whose parental background is from Russia and Poland, and a Sicilian-American mother who converted to Judaism. Kirschner calls herself a "spiritual Jew".

In 1994, Kirschner made a demo tape called, "Mitch Better Get My Bunny", using her stage name "Princess Superstar". She sent the tape to the labels "College Music Journal" and to the Beastie Boys' Grand Royal Records. Both labels were interested in the song and she went on to sign a contract with Dark Beloved Cloud Records, who released her song "I'm White" on their "Sympathy for Count Pococurante" album.

In 1996, she released her debut album "Strictly Platinum" and was released by 5th Beetle Records.

In 1997 she then found her own record label, which was first called "A Big Rich Major Label" and then changed the name to "Corrupt Conglomerate" and then released her second album "CEO" but when she released the album the label was still called "A Big Rich Major Label".

In 2000, she released her third album "Last of the Great 20th Century Composers" which was released on her label "Corrupt Conglomerate".

In 2001, she released her fourth album "Princess Superstar Is" which was released by Ruthless Records/Studio !K7. One of her biggest song to date, "Bad Babysitter" reached number eleven on the UK Singles chart.

In 2005, after taking a break, she released her fifth album "My Machine", which was very futuristic sounding, and featured music that was mainly a mixture of hip hop and electronica. One of the songs from the album called "Perfect", was remixed in 2007 and called "Perfect (Exceeder)", which was nominated as nominated for "Best Breaks/Electro Track," but lost to "Love Is Gone" by David Guetta.

In 2013, She released her sixth album "The New Evolution", she created a page on Pledge Music for her fans to purchase the album off of it.






