New Jersey Transit

New Jersey Transit Corporation, known as NJ Transit (NJT), is a state-owned public transportation system that serves New Jersey. It operates bus, rail, and commuter rail services throughout the state. It connects New York and Philadelphia.

NJT is the largest statewide system for public transporation and the third largest provider of bus, rail.

NJT was founded on July 17, 1979 by the New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT). It was to address many transportation issues.

In 1983, NJT assumed operation of all commuter rail service in New Jersey from Conrail. It now operates every passenger and commuter rail line in the state except for Amtrak; the Port Authority Trans-Hudson (PATH), which is owned by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey; the PATCO Speedline; two SEPTA Regional Rail lines, the West Trenton Line and the Trenton Line; and a handful of tourist trains in the southern and northwestern parts of New Jersey. Since inception, rail ridership has quadrupled.

During Hurricane Sandy in October 2012, the rail operations center of NJ Transit was flooded by of water.

The Governor of New Jersey appoints a seven-member Board of Directors.

NJT's operations are divided into three classes: bus, rail, and light rail.
NJT operates 871 bus routes using 2,477 buses 

NJT operates three light rail lines:


NJT has 11 commuter rail lines:

The New Jersey Transit Police Department (NJTPD) is the transit police force for NJT. It is a general-powers police agency with statewide jurisdiction with the primary focus on policing the numerous bus depots, rail, and light-rail stations throughout New Jersey. It employs 240 sworn police officers.

Superstorm Sandy, on October 29, 2012, caused a 13-foot tidal surge damaged many coastal communities.. The storm's aftermath left damaged tracks, moved bridge girders, and flooded rail stations. NJT has proposed the construction of a new generator in the Kearny Meadows that would be flood-proof. and support an electrical "micro-grid" that would be exclusively for train service.

Bus rapid transit in New Jersey is plentiful

NJT is planning to extend the Hudson-Bergen Light Rail to Englewood or Tenafly .

The Glassboro–Camden Line is a diesel multiple unit (DMU) light rail system planned for southwestern part of New Jersey in the United States. At its northern end in Camden it will connect with the River LINE with which its infrastructure and vehicles will be compatible. At the northern terminus, the Walter Rand Transportation Center, paid transfers will be possible to the PATCO Speedline.
 </nowiki>relarticle mainpage">The West Trenton Line is a proposed service connecting Trenton to Newark. NJT's estimate of the cost was $197 million. To date, no money has been given.

The Passaic-Bergen Passenger Rail Project would reintroduce passenger service on the New York, Susquehanna and Western Railway right-of-way between Hawthorne and Hackensack using new Diesel Multiple Unit rail cars.

The Monmouth-Ocean-Middlesex line is a proposed south and central New Jersey commuter rail route to New Brunswick, Newark and New York's Penn Station. This would restore service previously provided by the Central Railroad of New Jersey. It would run on a 40.1-mile rail train line. It would providec service from Monmouth Junction (South Brunswick) to Lakehurst .

From Monmouth Junction the line would continue southeast to Jamesburg, Monroe, Englishtown, Manalapan, Freehold Borough, Freehold Township, Howell and Farmingdale. Passengers for New York would transfer at Newark. Eight new stations and a train storage yard would be constructed.

In August 2010, NJT received $534,375 in Federal Funds to see if there are possibilities of a MOM line. Since that time there has been no further advancement of the project. 

In November 2008, the Lehigh Valley Economic Development Corporation started a study to explore making the Raritan Valley Line to the Lehigh_Valley region of eastern Pennsylvania. It could lead to stops in Allentown, Bethlehem and Easton. These cities were last served in 1967.

It was planned to connect the Downtown portion of Newark with Elizabeth via Newark Liberty International Airpor. NJT is no longer pursuing the Newark-Elizabeth Rail Link.



