Sultan Rahi Filmography

Below is the Complete filmography of the Pakistani actor Sultan Rahi. started his film career in 1956 from film Baghi as an extra and remained extra/fighter almost fourteen years but he kept on working hard without being disappointed for a single moment. Finally Almighty bestow his blessing upon him and he did in films that no one can even imagine that heights. He took off from Aslam Dar Bashira and only his death stopped him otherwise he remained as popular as he was after release of Bashira, the number of films in which he performed /acted is a world record. This page is meant to describe the details of his films and his film records. The number of exact films specifically his films as fighter and extra may require authenticated confirmation which is still looking for, in this regard your valuable input definitely will be a great assistance to the motive of.

After the consecutive failure of Urdu films, film director Aslam Pervaiz decided to make an action Punjabi film so he formulated the idea of Bashira and tried to engage Sawan for teh lead role of Bashira as he was well received after the success of Khan Chacha, but after Sawan‘s refusal (he demanded seventy thousand rupees), Aslam Dar finalized to take Sultan Rahi as hero of the film and discussed it with his colleagues but after listening the idea they all were not in favor of Sultan Rahi taking him as hero. But Aslam Dar was determined and completed the film with Sultan Rahi afterward Aslam realized that his friends were right as no film distributor was ready to take on this project finally Aslam Dar had to exhibit the film at his own and it turned the fortune of both of the actor and film director, rather it proved atrend setter film of the decade. Daud Butt Jailor Te Qaidi was inaugural film of pairing Sultan Rahi with Mustafa Qureshi and it worked so well that both the super stars together appeared in 165 films.
After sudden death of Sultan Rahi, some of his films were completed by Director and Actor Javed Hassan (with acting and voice dubbing) as Javed had similarity with Rahi in screen appearance voice tone and dialogues delivery. Sultan Rahi had an honor to act against four real sisters Sangeeta, Kaveeta, Anjuman and her sister Gori as a hero.

Sultan Rahi Platinium Jubilee Films

Sultan Rahi Golden Jubilee Films

Renowned film director and writer Nasir Adeeb had written two hundred and nineteen (219) films for Sultan Rahi basically his strong stories played very vital role in boosting his film career. In 1973]], he wrote his first film Wehshi Jatt which was a blockbuster film of its time Sakhi Badshah was his last film which he wrote for Sultan Rahi and it was another super hit film. Nasir Adeeb once said that Before Sultan Rahi, writers used to first write film story and then chose artists suitable / compatable for their story character but after Sultan Rahi arrival film writers started formulating film stories while keeping in view Sultan Rahi. At the time of his demise he was 58 years old but still he was appearing in films as hero of the film who was having his girlfriend and in certain cases up to half of his age but as his film lovers wanted him to be like that and during his film career he worked almost every Pakistani lead heroine which included Aasia, Anjuman, Shabnam, Najma, Babra Sharif, Neelo, Neeli, Nadira, Saima, Shahida Mini, Firdous, Naghma, Aaliya, Gori, Kavita, Sangeeta, Nargis, Sidra Khan, Durdana Rehman etc. Yet his private life was without any moral scandal. Sultan Rahi and Mustafa Qureshi were paired first time in Daud Butt’s Jailor Te Qaidi and this film worked so well that cinema gores specially the Punjabi cinema lovers remembered the legend pair of Akmal and Mazhar Shah. Their peak time started in 1975 and remained till mid-eighties 1979 was their peak time after the block buster release of Maula Jatt, and they became guarantee actors for any films consequently, both the super stars together appeared in 165 films.


