Sivaji Ganesan

Sivaji Ganesan was an actor of Tamil Cinema. He is also known as "Nadigar Thilagam", which means 'the pride of actors' (). He was one of the most respected movie actors in India. He was well known for his acting skills and versatility. He became an actor after performing as a stage actor in his childhood.

Sivaji' s real name is Villupuram Chinnaiahpillai Ganesan. He was born in Sirkazhi, Thanjavur district (now in Nagapattinam district), Madras Presidency (now Tamil Nadu) on 1 October 1928. He became an actor after performing as a stage actor in his childhood. He married Kamala and has two sons and two daughters named Ramkumar Ganesan, Prabhu Ganesan, Thenmozhi Ganesan and Shanti Ganesan.

Sivaji Ganesan acted in 283 movies in Tamil, Telugu, Kannada, Malayalam and Hindi. His career was started in the year 1952 and existed till 1999 for 47 years. His first movie was "Parasakthi". This movie tells about the misfortunes of the members of a Tamil family during World War II, how they met their individual fate and reunite again. This movie was a great success running for 175 days. 

"Andha Naal", a movie in 1954 by Sivaji set a new trend with no songs. The same year he acted along with Revolutionary leader M.G.Ramachandran in the movie "Koondukkili". His role in the movie "Veerapandiya Kattabomman" won him "Best actor" award at Afro-Asian Film Festival held at Cairo in March 1960. He was the first Indian to get the award abroad. 

Sivaji acted in nine roles by himself in the movie of "Navarathri". He acted as many epic characters such as Bhagat Singh, Veerapandiya Kattabomman, Karna, Lord Shiva etc. His first blockbuster came from the movie of "Vasantha Maaligai" in the year 1972. Following this movies like "Gauravam", "Raja Raja Cholan", "Karna", "Pasamalar", "Kappalottiya Tamilan", "Bale Pandiya", "Thri Soolam" etc became ultimate blockbuster movies.His last works are Padaiyappa and Pooparikka Varigirom released in the year 1999.

Sivaji Ganesan had respiratory problems and heart ailments. He was admitted in Apollo Hospital in Chennai on 21 June 2001. He died at 7:45 pm that day at the age of 72. His eldest son Ramkumar Ganesan performed his last rituals of his funeral at the Besant Nagar Crematorium, Chennai.



