Minimum total potential energy principle

The minimum total potential energy principle dictates that the continuum's potential energy becomes ever more negative.

All potential energy is gravitoelectric; other types of potential energy are temporary masks of the gravitoelectric potential energy. Almost all of the continuum's potential energy (rest mass) exists in the form of protons (a neutron is a proton that has captured an electron; outside the nucleus, a free neutron is unstable and has a mean lifetime of 881.5±1.5 s, after which it releases the captured electron and becomes a proton again).

The continuum's negative potential energy is a single irrotationally radial ("gravitoelectric") flux of the vacuum, flowing to the centre of each proton and then to the continuum's central proton. Because of its negative rest mass ("i.e.", negative resistance to acceleration), the flux self-accelerates to an infinite speed and exists in the form of wormholes created by a gravitoelectrical suction exerted from the future.

In the beginning of the continuum's 13.8‑billion‑year gravitational cycle, the gravitoelectrical suctions of uniformly distributed protons cancel each other, so that the resultant gravitoelectrical suction is zero. The continuum's central proton breaks the uniformity of protons' spatial distribution and thus creates a gravitoelectrical suction towards the central proton's centre.

The potential energy of a single proton is proportional to its radius. Therefore, the minimum total potential energy principle dictates that the radius of the proton shrinks with time. At that, the shrinking proton retains a half of the borrowed heat, so that the proton's temperature increases. The rate at which the self-gravitationally shrinking proton radiates away its heat is directly proportional to the proton's surface area and to the fourth power of the proton's temperature (the Stefan–Boltzmann law). When the proton's radius decreases tenfold, the proton's surface area decreases one‑hundred‑fold, while the proton's absolute temperature increases tenfold, so that the rate of energy loss and consequently the rate of the proton's self‑gravitational shrinkage increases by a factor of one hundred. In addition, when the proton's radius shrinks tenfold, the amount of the proton's potential energy decreases tenfold, so that the next tenfold decrease in the proton's radius will generate only one tenth of the amount of collapse‑impeding actual energy generated by the preceding tenfold decrease. Therefore, when the proton's radius shrinks tenfold, the speed of the proton's self‑gravitational shrinkage increases a thousandfold.

The ultimate fate of the universe is described by Arthur Eddington:

All change is relative. The universe is expanding relatively to our common material standards; our material standards are shrinking relatively to the size of the universe. The theory of the "expanding universe" might also be called the theory of the "shrinking atom". <...>
Let us then take the whole universe as our standard of constancy, and adopt the view of a cosmic being whose body is composed of intergalactic spaces and swells as they swell. Or rather we must now say it keeps the same size, for he will not admit that it is he who has changed. Watching us for a few thousand million years, he sees us shrinking; atoms, animals, planets, even the galaxies, all shrink alike; only the intergalactic spaces remain the same. The earth spirals round the sun in an ever‑decreasing orbit. It would be absurd to treat its changing revolution as a constant unit of time. The cosmic being will naturally relate his units of length and time so that the velocity of light remains constant. Our years will then decrease in geometrical progression in the cosmic scale of time. On that scale man's life is becoming briefer; his threescore years and ten are an ever‑decreasing allowance. Owing to the property of geometrical progressions an infinite number of our years will add up to a finite cosmic time; so that what we should call the end of eternity is an ordinary finite date in the cosmic calendar. But on that date the universe has expanded to infinity in our reckoning, and we have shrunk to nothing in the reckoning of the cosmic being.
We walk the stage of life, performers of a drama for the benefit of the cosmic spectator. As the scenes proceed he notices that the actors are growing smaller and the action quicker. When the last act opens the curtain rises on midget actors rushing through their parts at frantic speed. Smaller and smaller. Faster and faster. One last microscopic blurr of intense agitation. And then nothing.
The negative gravitational potential energies ("i.e.", gravitational pulls) of uniformly distributed protons cancel each other, so that the potential energy of every proton is maximal ("i.e.", zero), while the actual energy of every proton is minimal ("i.e.", zero). Such protons have enormously big radii and fill the entire volume of the continuum without any gaps of negative-energy vacuum between them. The minimum total potential energy principle dictates that the continuum's protons begin their gravitational involution from such a state of maximal potential energy:

Accordingly the primordial state of things which I picture is an even distribution of protons and electrons, extremely diffuse and filling all (spherical) space, remaining nearly balanced for an exceedingly long time until its inherent instability prevails. We shall see later that the density of this distribution can be calculated; it was about one proton and electron per litre. There is no hurry for anything to begin to happen. But at last small irregular tendencies accumulate, and evolution gets under way. The first stage is the formation of condensations ultimately to become the galaxies; this, as we have seen, started off an expansion, which then automatically increased in speed until it is now manifested to us in the recession of the spiral nebulae.
As the matter drew closer together in the condensations, the various evolutionary processes followed—evolution of stars, evolution of the more complex elements, evolution of planets and life.

Conversely, the negative gravitational potential energies ("i.e.", gravitational pulls) of dendritically ("i.e.", hierarchically) distributed protons amplify each other in accordance with the inverse-square law. Therefore, the continuum's gravitational centre is not the most massive object. Instead, the continuum's gravitational centre is the most densely dendritic object—the most intelligent man, who exerts his attraction from the future and thus hierarchizes the continuum's matter into his psychokinetically controlled cosmic body, which is a mycelium of galaxy filaments converging towards the central mushroom (the most intelligent man's cerebrum), so that the hierarchicity factor ("G") increases. Said otherwise, history is the gravitational vortex of the psychokinetically omnipotent man's self-assembly:



