Naava Nabagesera

The youngest child in a family of six, Naava Nabagesera was born to a middle-class Kiganda family. The fact that her mother is the daughter of the late Kabaka (king) Daudi Chwa (father of Kabaka Mutesa II) of the Buganda kingdom means that Nabagesera is of royal descent. However, since the Buganda monarchy was abolished in 1966, this aspect of her lineage carried very little significance in Nabagesera's formative years. Despite the fact that her mother was raised in the palace, she does not hold any diplomas or degree certificates. However, she has established herself as a very astute businesswoman. Nabagesera's father, who passed away in 1988, was an administrator and worked in the civil service as a district education officer.

In primary and secondary school Nabagesera held a series of responsible positions, such as prefect, school timekeeper, and head of the debating society. During her first year of law school at twenty years of age, she was married and in the same year bore a set of twins, which earned her the honorific title Nnalongo. Having a family to raise made it hard for Nabagesera to join campus politics, let alone pursue her law degree, and it took a lot of determination and hard work for her to complete the course. She attributes her resolute spirit to her mother:

My mother has been a major influence in my life. She's a very vociferous woman who takes on challenges. She takes on any kind of job that can earn her a living and does not lie back and say, "I'm a lady." I've never known my mother to stay at home. She told me that if you want to go for something do it the best way you can; if you really have the conviction that you can do something, just go all the way. She's a very active woman and has headed many organizations such as YWCA - she's one of the pioneers of that organization.

After obtaining her law degree and completing the bar course, Nabagesera was employed as a legal associate in a small law firm in Kampala and worked there for a year. She spent 1993 doing voluntary work as a legal adviser in a local nongovernmental organization called the Association of Women Lawyers (Federacion Internacional de Abogades, FIDA). Her work in the FIDA legal aid clinic exposed her to the realities of gender oppression and subordination suffered by Ugandan women, especially the indigent. The following year Nabagesera set up her own chambers, thus adding to the handful of female-owned law firms in Kampala.

