Gou Bu Li baozi

Gou Bu Li baozi is a group of restaurants in TianJin, China that sells steamed buns. Gou Bu Li baozi was established in 1858.It is one of the most famous foods in Tian Jin. Gou Bu Li’s shop is one of the oldest and most famous shops in that city. In 1960, the Gou Bu Li baozi went out of China to foreign countries. Now there are so many shops in China. 

Gou Bu Li Baozi was founded in the Qing Dynasty in 1858. It was started by Gao You Gui when he was young, His family named him "young dog". He lived in Tian Jin when he was very young. He was a worker in Liu's store. It took him 3 years to learn how to make Baozi very pleasing and beautiful. Firstly, he started a store called "cheap and friendly store". 

 Because his Baozi is very very pleasing, many people went to his store. So that he is too having much to do to talk with the persons getting goods from store. So his person getting goods from store called him dog ignored. That's why "Gou Bu Li "is so greatly respected and so many people called it that until now. 

When Yuan shikai was a person doing teaching in army in Tian Jin. He gave this to queen Dowager Cixi, she is very happy and say:"Gou Bu Li baozi is so very pleasing that it is better that the animal’s meat in the mountain or the seafood in the sea, after I take it, I think I go back to a young person." After this Gou Bu Li baozi is more greatly respected than it used to.

In the 1920s, with the Tianjin advertisement inside middle moving south and moving closer to the land rights,Gao yougui not taken into account the buns store and moved to the Tianxiang market of tianjin But after this the business is not good for a long time and on the edge to shut down. After the groups of persons Republic of China be started. any private companies change quality of to Public - private the way of loving persons. In March 15th 1956, the Tianjin food company in the peaceful part of the shandong Road military building made strong against attack Park Ruizhuang place opened in tianjin Gou Bu Li baozi store, then, the Chinese leaders put on air of being more important than other person many times.

Gao You Gui is a ratio of 3 to 7 fat and fresh pork and even with the right amount of water, ribs soup and belly soup, and accompanied by sesame oil, soy sauce, ginger, diced green onions made into stuffing. The steamed buns will be half of the rubbing, after the release agent, roll into a diameter of 8.5 cm and thick uniform round skin. Pack with your fingers with a pinch and twist open, so there will be 18 pleats, looking like a flower, and finally steam the buns.

Do not use jam. Use mushroom and chicken or special flour to make sure the baozi is small and delicious. And so many people had learn the method of how to make baozi but his baozi never be surpassed.

In 1980, Gou Bu Li has the logo. In 1992 Gou Bu Li became the first one that have a logo. At present, the Gou Bu Li has been registered in the 11 international classification, service trademark in 1999 by the State Administration for Industry and Commerce Trademark Office identified as "China Famous Brand", which is the commercial value of its brand affirmed. 

In the 1980s, Gou Bu Li baozi began franchise chain operations. In 1980, Beijing Hua Tian Diet Group Company introduced the Gou Bu Li to Beijing. In 2004, the Gou Bu Li open a branch in Taiwan.There are nowmany branches in China. 

TV show: Legend of Gou Bu Li baozi


