Repentless

Repentless is the twelfth studio album by the American thrash metal band Slayer. It was released on September 11, 2015, and is the band's first album to be released on Nuclear Blast. It is also the first Slayer album to feature guitarist Gary Holt of Exodus and the first to feature drummer Paul Bostaph since 2001's "God Hates Us All".

The album made it to #4 on the Billboard 200, which was the highest charting album from the band in the United States. It also topped the chart in Germany and was featured in the top ten of almost twenty charts around the world. It got mixed to positive reviews from critics. 

Slayer where asked in 2011 if they were going to make another album, which then-Slayer drummer Dave Lombardo replied that although nothing had been written yet, there were "definitely plans". In early 2011, guitarist Jeff Hanneman became ill with necrotizing fasciitis. Some said that he got the illness from a spider bite he claimed to have received while in a friend's hot tub. When asked about a new record, bassist Tom Araya stated that any work would have to wait until Hanneman had recovered.

On February 20, 2013, it was announced that Lombardo would not take part in Slayer's Australia tour because of contractual disputes, and he would be replaced by former drummer Jon Dette. Lombardo's permanent replacement was later announced to be Paul Bostaph, who was previously the band's drummer from 1992–2001, appearing on several albums.

On May 2, 2013, Jeff Hanneman died of liver failure in a Los Angeles hospital. A week later, it was announced that he died from an alcohol-related cirrhosis. Hanneman and his family had did not know how bad his condition was until shortly before his death. Kerry King later said that he wants the band to continue, but Araya was unsure. He said that, "After 30 years, it would literally be like starting over," and told about his doubts that Slayer's fanbase would approve of such a change. In March 2015, Araya revealed that the band had recorded one song before Hanneman died, and that the song will appear on the album.

Credits came from the album's notes.



