Ter Hachatrjan

Ter Hachatrjan () is the name of a Russian noble family during the 18th century. 

Duke Aleksandr Ter Hachatrjan (around 1870–1917) was born as an Armenian aristocrat. He also belonged to the Russian nobility. He married a Greek duchess named Sofia. They had two sons together: Duke Anton Aleksandrovich (around 1891–1950) and Duke Bagrat Aleksandrovich (1892–1981).

During the revolution in Petrograd in 1917, Duke Aleksandr and his wife were killed by the Bolsheviks. Their two sons then escaped from Petrograd and went to the Caucasus. Bagrat was separated from his brother Anton.

Anton later appeared in the city Rostov on Don. He married Barinova Elena Aleksandrovna. They had no children.

Bagrat got married to Elizaveta Danilovna in 1923. They had a daughter and a son together: Emma Bagratovna (1924–2005) and Yuri Bagratovich. Bagrat divorced Elizaveta in 1927. In the year 1932, Bagrat married Petrachuk Olga Alekseevna, the daughter of merchant from Ukraine. They had two daughters together: Amalia Bagratovn (born 1933) and Inessa Bagratovna (born 1936). Bagrat was an officer in the Imperial Army. He was awarded the Military Order of the Saint Grand Martyr and the Triumphant George. It was one of the highest awards of the Russian Empire.

The Ter Hachatrjan family fell under the repression of NKVD in 1937. They were arrested and placed in jail in the city of Goris. Bagrat Aleksandrovich was accused of taking part in the execution of 26 Baku Commissars. As was the case with all noble families, Duke Bagrat was found guilty of treason and was declared an enemy of the Soviet State. Under the pressure of the government, Duke Bagrat had to stop using his title and rid himself of all his possessions that were brought from Petrograd. The family were then given amnesty.

After, that Bagrat Aleksandrovich worked as a director and actor of movies in Armenia. He died in Kafan in 1981.

Amalia Bagratovna married Saidoff N. S., a rich man from Baku. They had two children together: Saidoff A. N. (born 1961) and Saidoff S. C. N. (born 1963).

Since this time, all the descendents of the Ter Hachatrjan family are named as Saidoff–Ter Hachatrjan.

Ter-Khachatryan or Ter-Khachatryants is an Armenian family, known from the XVIII century. First well-known representative of this family - Daniel-Bek of Sassun Ter Khachatryan or Ter Khachatryan (born in province Sassun or Sason of Western Armenia) about 1785 - died in (town Mush of Western Armenia), in 1829). He was originally an Armenian nobleman, descendant of South or Sout-West branch, i.e. Tarawn-Аldznik branch of Bagratouni or Bagratids dynasty (Actually son of the Armenian priest of Khachatur and, who was a descendant of the Armenian princely dynasty Bagratid, the south or south-west branch of them in 13-14 centuries saved shallow possessions in the district of Sassun or Sason of Western Armenia and province of Aldznik, as well as in the district of Mush in the province of Tarawn of Western Armenia). As a result of the hard oppressions of Kurd feudal lords, Daniel-Bek of Sassun transmigrated from Sason to the town Mush, where his family had a house in the Armenian quarter of Berd, near the church Saint Marineh. The eldest son of Daniel-Bek of Sassun, Avdal bek Ter-Khachatryants (1805-1867) also lived in Mush. The son of Avdal bek Ter-Khachatryants and grandson of Daniel-Bek of Sassun was Jakob bek (Hakob bek) Ter-Khachatryants. The son of Jakob bek (Hakob bek) Ter-Khachatryants was Khachatur-Bek of Mush (the town Mush of Western Armenia), who lived in the first half of the 19th century. Khachar and Garegin Khachatryan, both prominent Armenian artists and ideologists of Armenian liberation movement, were descendents of his House.


