Moto GP on BBC

Moto GP on BBC was a presentation of Moto GP produced by BBC Sports. Races and qualifying are televised on BBC One, BBC Two, BBC Three or BBC HD and streamed live on BBC Red Button.

In March 2003, BBC signed a two year deal to broadcast Moto GP races with Suzi Perry hosting all races while most rounds were shown on Sunday Grandstand or on Grandstand if it was a Saturday race. For 2003, Exclusive live coverage was on Eurosport and BBC chose to broadcast four races live (Britain, Pacific, Australia and Valencia.) with their own commentary team for Britain, Australia and Valencia of Charlie Cox and Steve Parrish, using the world feed commentary in the other races of Nick Harris and Matt Roberts with Gavin Emmett in the pits. Delayed coverage was used in the remaining twelve races (Japan, South Africa, Spain, France, Italy, Catalan, Dutch TT, Germany, Czech Republic, Pourtugal, Rio de Janeiro and Malaysia.) All races were shown on BBC Two during the 2003 season. In 2004, Cox and Parrish commentated full time with twelve live races (South Africa, Spain, France, Italy, Catalan, Britain, Czech Republic, Pourtugal, Japan, Qatar, Australia and Valencia) and with delayed coverage was used in the remaining four races (Dutch TT, Germany, Rio de Janeiro and Malaysia.) Most races were shown on BBC Two during the 2004 season, Only Qatar was shown on BBC One because it was a Saturday race. Gavin Emmett joined as pit reporter in 2005 and the BBC had ten live races (Spain, France, Italy, Catalan, Britain, Germany, Czech Republic, Qatar, Turkish and Valencia) and with delayed coverage was used in the remaining seven races (Pourtugal, Chinese, Dutch TT, United States, Japan, Australia and Malaysia.) Most races were shown on BBC Two during the 2005 season, Only Qatar was shown on BBC One because it was a Saturday race. In 2006 All races were shown live with five races (Chinese, United States, Japan, Australia and Malaysia.) on the BBC Red Button while all the rounds were on BBC Two including re runs from the early morning races. Grandstand got written out by the BBC before the 2007 Moto GP season started.

