Láadan

Láadan is a feminist constructed language. Its creator was Suzette Haden Elgin. She believed that Western languages were better for saying what men think than what women think. She created the language to make it easier for women to say what they think. For example, Láadan has many words and suffixes for saying how you feel about what you are saying. It also includes words for saying if you know that what you are saying is true, and if so, how.

The language became part of a series of science fiction books, Native Tongue. In the book, a group of women create Láadan as a way to fight a society ruled by men.

Láadan is a tonal language. Some syllables are said in a higher voice or tone than others. There are two tones:
Láadan itself is a three-syllable word, LA-a-dan, where the first syllable is said in a high tone.

Láadan has five vowels:

Láadan does not have the consonants p, t, k, g, or s. The consonants b, d, sh, m, n, l, r, w, y, and h are the same as in English. There is also:

Most Láadan sentences have three short words called particles:
In Láadan, the verbs come first. Verbs are the same words as adjectives. There are no articles like an or the. The object of a verb has the suffix -(e)th. It usually comes after the subject. The prefix me- says that the subject of a verb is plural. The word "ra" means the same thing as English "not".

New Láadan words are made by adding prefixes and suffixes to old words. Each part of a word stays the same when it combines with other parts. Because of this, it is called an agglutinative language. The affixes (prefixes and suffixes) can be used to show feelings and attitudes. Many languages can only show these by tone of voice, body language, or roundabout speech.

Pronouns in Láadan are made of many parts. The letter "l" is used for I and we. The letter "n" is used for you. The letter "b" is used for he, she, it, and they.

The vowel "e" usually comes after these letters. "a" can come after them instead to show that someone is loved. If the person is hated, "lhe-" can be put before the word.

The suffix "-zh" makes a pronoun plural but less than four. "-n" makes it plural and greater than four. So "lazh" means "we, who are few and loved." "Lheben" means "they, who are many and who I hate."



