Monstercat

Monstercat (also known as Monstercat Media) is a Canadian-based independent electronic dance music (EDM) record label in Vancouver, British Columbia. Monstercat was formed in July 2011 by Mike Darlington CEO, and Ari Paunonen, COO.

The label signs artists on a non-exclusive single-track basis, allowing artists to freely move between other labels and brands. Monstercat follows a simple release schedule, where new music is released three times a week on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, in addition to an hour-long podcast that is live streamed every Tuesday on their Twitch account. Once Monstercat has released thirty tracks consecutively, a new compilation album is created containing these tracks and two continuous mixes of the album. At several points in time, Monstercat has released a track outside of their regular release schedule for various reasons.

In July 2011, Monstercat's current CEO - Mike Darlington - along with Ari Pauonen, Monstercat's current COO, created the Monstercat YouTube channel as a way for their friends to promote themselves and share music with each other. The two created compilation albums to provide artists with an easy method of releasing their music, as well as lessening the competitiveness between the artists. Monstercat's first compilation album, Launch Week, featured seven artists: Feint, Halo Nova (currently Varien / Koinu), Stephen Walking, Ephixa, Neilio, Arion and Going Quantum.

In December 2011, Monstercat signed the very notable musical group Krewella, an American electronic dance music duo (at the time, a trio) from Chicago, Illinois. "Killin' It" was Krewella's first original song released by a label. Monstercat promoted Krewella using many social media campaigns and partnered with many EDM YouTube promotional channels for a larger platform.

During the first few months of 2014, Monstercat partnered with the electric family in aid of the Humane Society of Canada. In December 2014, Monstercat launched a 24-hour digital radio station, hosted on Twitch. To this day, Monstercat continues to release compilation albums containing thirty songs and two mixes each.

The following is a list of all the artists that are on Monstercat's current roster. Please note that not all artists who've released with Monstercat are necessarily supposed to be on this list.


The following is a list of artists who previously released music with Monstercat.



