Iambic pentameter

Iambic pentameter is a kind of verse. It is the most common kind of verse in English literature. 

The two words seem difficult, because the words are Greek. "Pentameter" means "consisting of five measures" and "iambic" "consisting of iambs". 

The rhythm which words make in the line is measured in small groups of syllables called "feet". The word "iambic" refers to the type of foot that is used, known as the "iamb". This is an unstressed syllable followed by a stressed syllable. The word "pentameter" indicates that a line has five of these "feet".

In theory every line is composed of ten syllables and have five stresses. Stresses fall on the second, the fourth, the sixth, the eighth and the tenth syllable. This is marked with two signs. The sign "x" stands for a syllable with no stress, and the sign "/" stands for a syllable with stress. So a line of iambic pentameter is:

In real poems lines have often an extra syllable at the end and sometimes lack the first unaccented syllable. A line can be divided in five units that are called "feet". The unit x / is called an "iamb" or "iambic foot". Sometimes the pattern is changed. First foot can be reversed: / x x / x / x / x /.
When iambic pentameter is unrhymed it is called blank verse. Blank verse was introduced into English poetry by Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey. Thomas Kyd used it in his "The Spanish Tragedy". 

There are no rhymes in blank verse, but alliteration often occurs in it, for example "prime and pride".

William Shakespeare's dramas are written chiefly in blank verse. The first line of the famous Hamlet's monologue is an example: 

John Milton used blank verse in Paradise Lost. Many other poets (for example Edwin Atherstone, John Fitchett, Alfred Tennyson, Robert Browning and Matthew Arnold employed it long poems. John Fitchett's "King Alfred" is perhaps the longest epic poem written in blank verse. It consists of more than 130 000 lines. But Alexander Pope wrote iambic pentameter with rhymes. One line rhymes with the next. It is called heroic couplet.

Dramatic monologues are usually written in blank verse. Good examples are Tennyson's "St Simeon Stylites" and "Ulysses" or Browning's "The Ring and the Book". Robert Frost wrote similar poems in the United States.
Lines of iambic pentameter can be set also into stanzas. An example of a stanza is rhyme royal that consists of seven lines and rhymes ababbcc. It was used by Emma Lazarus in the poem "Sympathy" from the sequence "Epochs".

Iambic pentameter is used also in English sonnets.

The rhythm of iambic pentameter is close to the rhythm of everyday English speech. Iambic pentameter is common in German literature, too. This example is from "The Flamingos" by Rainer Maria Rilke:




