Qutb Minar

Qutb-ud-din Aibak was a ruler of the Mamluk dynasty of the Delhi Sultanate. He was born to a Turkish family in Central Asia. He was sold as a slave in his childhood. But this went well because he was bought up by a Qazi of Nishapur. He was treated like one of the sons of this Qazi. But after a few years, his master died and the Sultan Mohammad Ghori bought him. He soon became one of the favourites of Sultan Mohammad. When Mohammad died in 1206, he became the Sultan in India. He spent part of his time at Delhi, but was very fond of the city of Lahore, in Punjab (now in Pakistan) and did much to beautify it. He died in 1210 due to a fall from a horse whilst playing Polo and was buried at Lahore. Qutubuddin Aibak, a ruler of medieval India, was the first ruler of the Delhi Sultanate and also the founder of the Slave dynasty. He was a Turkish of the Aybak tribe and was the sultan for only four years, 1206-1210. He was captured in his childhood and sold as a slave to the chief Qazi of Nishapur, a town situated in the northeastern Iran. He was very well treated by the Qazi and imparted good education, including training in archery and horsemanship in his childhood. However when the master died, his jealous sons sold Qutubuddin Aibak to a slave merchant.

He was finally purchased by the ruler of Ghor in central Afghanistan, Sultan Muhammad Ghori. Qutubuddin Aibak gradually rose to the rank of a Commander and became one of the most trusted slave of Sultan Ghori. The conquests of northern India were executed mainly by Qutb-ud-din Aibak, which helped Ghori to consolidate his position there. Gradually, as Sultan Ghori concentrated on Central Asia after 1192, he was given the independent charge of the conquests in India. Qutb-ud-din Aibak gave large sums of money in charity, thus earning the name LAKH BAKSH or giver of lakhs.

Muhammad Ghori established himself as strong ruler with his empire extending over Afghanistan, Pakistan, and northern India. Qutubuddin Aibak crowned himself the Sultan of Delhi in 1206, when Muhammad Ghori was killed on the battlefield. After his death, when Aibak came to the throne, he ruled over those places where he was appointed as the local receiver-general of Sultan Ghori. Despite the rebellions by nobles like Taj-ud-din Ildiz and Nasir-ud-din Qubachah, he strengthened the administrative system, which was established by Ghori.

Though Qutb-ud-din Aibak started the construction of the Quwwat-ul-Islam mosque and the Qutub Minar, which were among the earliest Muslim monuments in Delhi, he could not complete them. These architectures were later completed by his successor Shamsuddin Iltutmish.

In 1210, Qutb-ud-din Aibak died in an accident while he was playing polo. He fell from a horse and was severely injured. He was buried in Lahore near the Anarkali Bazaar. He was succeeded by Shamsuddin Iltutmish, another slave who rose to the level of a Sultan, thus extending the Slave/Mamluk Dynasty.He wasnt interested in expanding his territory instead wanted to settle problems in his present empire.His one of the favorite ruler was Iltutmish .

Related pages Edit

List of notable Lahoris

