The Guianas

The Guianas (; ; ) are a region in northeastern South America along the Atlantic coast, divided in several territories and independent countries.

The Guianas are on the Guiana Shield, a Precambrian geological formation that is limited to the south and to the east by Brazil, to the west by Venezuela and to the north by the Atlantic Ocean.

The Guianas includes the following three territories, from west to east:

Two other territories are sometimes added:

The territories of the Guianas were made colonies from the 17th century by England, Netherlands, France, Portugal and Spain, resulting in its present division. The colonies were then:

Guyana (officially the Co-operative Republic of Guyana) is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the north, Brazil to the south and southwest, Suriname to the east and Venezuela to the west. It has an area of with a population of 735,909 (estimate for July 2016). The population density is of inhabitants/km. The official language is English.

The largest cities (2012 census) are: Georgetown (118,363 inhabitants), Linden (27,277 inhabitants) and New Amsterdam (17,329 inhabitants).

The highest point is Mount Roraima () at high. It is in the Pacaraima Mountains, a mountain range in the southwest of the country.

The largest river of the country is the Essequibo river; it starts in the Acarai Mountains and flows to the north for into the Atlantic Ocean at from Georgetown, the capital city of Guyana.

Suriname (officially the Republic of Suriname, ) is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the north, French Guiana to the east, Guyana to the west and Brazil to the south. It has an area of with a population of 585,824 (estimate for July 2016). The population density is of inhabitants/km. The official language is Dutch.

The largest cities (2012 census) are: Paramaribo (240,924 inhabitants), Koewarasan (27,713 inhabitants) and De Nieuwe Grond (26,161 inhabitants).

The highest point is Julianatop () at high. It is in the Sipaliwini District in the center of the country.

The largest river of the country is the Courantyne river; it starts in the Acarai Mountains and flows to the north for about into the Atlantic Ocean between Guyana and Suriname.

French Guiana () is an overseas department and region of France. It is bordered by Surinam to the west, Brazil to the south and east, and the Atlantic Ocean to the north. It has an area of , with a population of 252,338. The population density is of inhabitants/km. The official language is French.

The largest cities (2014) are: Cayenne (55,817 inhabitants), Saint-Laurent-du-Maroni (44,169 inhabitants) and Matoury (31,934 inhabitants).

The highest point is Bellevue de l'Inini () at high.

The main rivers of the French Guiana are:




