Ñuble Province

The Ñuble Province () is one of four provinces of the Chilean region of Bío Bío (VIII). The provincial capital Is the city of Chillán.

It is the second province in area in the Bío Bío region, after the Bío Bío province, and the second with more people living in it, after the Concepción province. The province is named after the Ñuble river.

The Ñuble province is in the northern part of the Bío Bío region with an area of . The capital, Chillán, is at about from Santiago, the national capital.

Ñuble is bordered to the north by the Maule region (Cauquenes and Linares provinces), to the east by Argentina, to the south by the Bío Bío province and to the west by the Concepción province and the Pacific Ocean.

The highest mountains are in the Andes, in the eastern part of the province; these mountains are the Nevados de Chillán.

The main rivers that flows through the province are the Ñuble and the Itata.

The climate in Chillán is a Mediterranean climate, Csb in the Köppen climate classification.

The average amount of precipitation for the year in Chillán is . The month with the most precipitation on average is June with of precipitation. The month with the least precipitation on average is February with an average of .

The average temperature for the year in Chillán is . The warmest month, on average, is January with an average temperature of . The coolest month on average is July, with an average temperature of .

 (last national census), there were 438,103 people living in the province, giving it a population density of inhabitants/km². The urban population was 285,108 persons ( of the total).

The largest city of the province, in 2002, is its capital, Chillán, with 146,701 inhabitants. Other cities are San Carlos (29,359 inhabitants) and Chillán Viejo (18,827 inhabitants).

As a province, Ñuble is a second-level administrative division, consisting of 21 communes ("comunas"). The city of Chillán serves as the provincial capital. The province is administered by a governor.




