Che'Nelle

Cheryline Ernestine Lim (born 10 March 1983), better known by her stage name Che'Nelle, is a Malaysian Australian recording artist signed to Universal Music Japan. Her debut single "I Fell in Love with the DJ" was released in 2007 and reached the top twenty in France.

Lim moved to Perth, Western Australia at age 10. Before breaking out on the music scene in 2007, Che'Nelle was featured on English hip hop and R&B music producer S4DK's "Dear Summer" albums including the first installment in 2005 with a R&B ballad called "Slow Down" which sampled fellow R&B singer Bobby V's song of the same name, two years later she appeared on the second and final installment called "Dear Summer Volume Two" with the R&B ballad "Hooked Up".

Her debut album "Things Happen for a Reason" was released on 25 September 2007 in Japan and 29 October 2007 in Australia.
The first single from this album was "I Fell in Love with the DJ" featuring reggae artist Cham.

Che'Nelle has written songs for herself and also co-wrote Carmit Bachar's single "Fierce", Ricki-Lee's debut single "Hell No!" and Leona Lewis's song "Can't Breathe".

Her second album was later confirmed as "Feel Good", which it was named after the first single from the album, the song and album was strongly influenced by R&B and reggae much like "Things Happen for a Reason", however "Feel Good" and (to date) all her other albums wre only released in Japan.

In 2011, Che'Nelle released her third album "Luv Songs" which saw a departure from Che'Nelle's reggae sound for an R&B, soul sound. The album consisted of mainly R&B cover ballads from American singers like Ne-Yo, Whitney Houston and Minnie Riperton as well as cover of many Japanese known songs.

In 2012, Che'Nelle released her forth album "Believe"; much like 2011's "Luv Songs" it was heavily rooted in an R&B and Japanese music sound.

In 2013, Che'Nelle released her fifth album "Aishiteru" which is Japanese for the phrase "I Love You", the album was her first album to be mainly recorded in Japanese with a few English songs.

In 2014, Che'Nelle released her sixth album "Luv Songs 2"; it was her second installment in the "Luv Songs" series and like 2011's "Luv Songs", it features a mixture of traditional Japanese love songs with several covers of R&B songs including "We Found Love" by Barbadian R&B singer Rihanna.

In 2015, Che'Nelle released her seventh album "@chenelleworld", it is her most recent album.




