Amjadi Bano

If we look at the history of Indo-Pak partition there are many courageous women who worked equally hard with the men for the separate nation for Muslims named Pakistan. Freedom moment cannot be portrayed without mentioning all these women who are role model for the current generation. All the women contributed very actively in the freedom moment. Amjadi Bano Begum is one of these brave and courageous women. Amjadi begum was daughter of Azmat Ali Khan who was very prominent figure in Rampur. She lost her father in childhood and was brought up by her grandmother. At that time there were no institutions for the Muslim girls that’s why she was remained at home and was educated there.
She got married to Molana Muhammad Ali Johar in 1902. Molana Muhammad Ali Johar was a great Muslim leader who was very passionate about his country. It will not be wrong if said that she was the first Muslim female political leader of British India. She was the woman of that time when women were restricted to their homes and their obligation was to take care of their home and children. With the support of her husband and mother-in-law, she broke all the restriction and joined Khilafat Movement. Molana Muhammad Ali Johar oreved to be a very supportive husband and she was very inspired by the political and philosophical vies of the Molana.
In every journey and meeting of Molana she went along with him, even she attended the round table conference of London in 1930. She did not stop working even after the death of Molana Muhammad Ali johar who died on 4 January 1931. Quaid e Azam always admired her work and passion. Amjadi Begum was appointed as a member of working committee of Pakistan Muslim League by Quaid e Azam. This committee was of twenty-five members and she was the only woman among them. On the twenty-seventh annual session of Muslim League held at Lahore from 22 to 24 March 1940 and on 23 March a resolution drafted by All India Muslim League was presented and was approved at the general public session. As a member of committee, she participated in the drafting of that historic resolution of Pakistan.
At the annual session of All India Muslim League, Lucknow she put the foundation of separate wing for women under the All India Muslim League. The women central subcommittee was organized in 1938 under All India Muslim League and first annual session of women subcommittee was held in 1940. Amjadi Begum motivated many other women of prominent families to participate in political activities.
Amjadi Begum worked hard and motivated other women as well. She died on 28 March 1947. On her death Quaid e Azam said that it was a great loss for the nation.

