WrestleMania 33

WrestleMania 33 will be the thirty-third yearly WrestleMania wrestling Pay-per-view made by WWE. It will happen on April 2, 2017 and it will be performed at the Camping World Stadium in Orlando, Florida. It will be the second WrestleMania to happen at the stadium and the third to happen Florida.

At the 2017 Royal Rumble, Randy Orton won the most important match - the Royal Rumble match for a world championship match at WrestleMania 33. At the Elimination Chamber on February 12, 2017, Bray Wyatt won the WWE Championship but Randy said he won't fight Bray because he supports Bray. This means he will probably fight for the WWE Universal Championship, but Goldberg is fighting for that title at Fastlane on March 5, 2017 and he's supposed to fight Brock Lesnar at WrestleMania. Besides that, after Randy said he won't fight Bray, a 10-man battle royal happened where, in the end AJ Styles and Luke Harper fought on the apron after both going over the top rope, their feet both touched the floor and the referees couldn't decide who won. On SmackDown on February 28, a match between AJ and Luke will happen where the winner will fight Bray at WrestleMania. Also, at WrestleMania 32, it was a surprise when Shaquille O'Neal was in a the Andre the Giant Memorial Battle Royal. Big Show was also in the match and they fought. After that WrestleMania, Shaq asked if Big Show wanted a match at this WrestleMania. After that, they have argued inside of WWE. On the final Raw before Mania, after Show defeated James Ellsworth, Shaq confronted Show and challenged him to a Contract vs Career match (that mean if Shaq beat Show, Shaq will become a full time wrestler of WWE and Show will be forced to leave WWE). Show accepted under one more condition, this will be a Airplane match( the first wrestler falls off the airplane will lose)

Winner: Randy Orton
Singles match for WWE Universal Championship
Winner: Brock Lesnar

3. Chris Jericho © vs Kevin Owens. 
Singles match for the WWE United States Championship
Winner: Kevin Owens

4. Bayley © vs Charlotte vs Sasha Banks vs Nia Jax
Fatal 4 away Match for the WWE Raw Women's championship. And Dana Brooke. Banned from the Building 
Winner: Bayley
5. Luke Gallows and Karl Anderson © vs Enzo Amore and Colin Cassidy vs Cesaro and Sheamus 
triple threat ladder Tag team match for WWE raw tag team championship
Winner: The Hardy Boyz
The Hardy boyz won this match after there shocking return 
6. Alexa Bliss © vs. TBD. 
TBD Match type for the WWE Smackdown Live Women's championship

7. Andre the giant memorial battle royal match 
Battle Royal match for the Andre the giant memorial Trophy 

8. The Undertaker vs. Roman Reigns No Holds Barred match
Winner: Roman Reigns 
after the undertaker lost this match he retired 

10. Dean Ambrose © vs. Baron Corbin singels match for the WWE 
Intercontinental championship 
Winner: Dean Ambrose
11. Neville © vs. Austin Aries singles match for the Cruiserweight championship 
Winner: Neville

12: AJ Styles vs Shane MCmahon Singels match
Winner: AJ Styles

12. TBD © vs TBD vs. TBD vs. TBD vs. TBD vs. TBD vs. TBD vs. TBD vs TBD vs. TBD 

10-man Battle royal for a new WWE Cruiserweight Championship for SmackDown 

13. TBD vs. TBD vs. TBD vs. TBD vs. TBD vs TBD vs TBD vs TBD vs TBD vs. TBD 

10 man battle royal to become number one Contender for Adrian Neville´s Cruiserweight Championship 

Announced Andre the giant memorial battle royal Participants
R = Raw
B= Smackdown

Name. Date. Declared
Mojo Rawley. March,7,2017
Apollo Crews. March,7,2017

big show march,13,2017


