USS Robalo

The USS Robalo (SS-273) was a gato class submarine of the US Navy in World War II.

The vessel undertook 3 patrols:

"En route" from Pearl Harbor to her new station in Fremantle submarine base, Western Australia, she had an encounter with enemy vessels: on 13 February 1944 her attack was unsuccessful and no enemy vessels were damaged or sunk.  She spent 36 of her 57-day mission submerged. When she arrived, her commanding officer was summarily relieved by Admiral Christie and replaced.

For her second patrol, "Robalo" went to the South China Sea, assigned to interdict Japanese tanker traffic from French Indochina to the fleet anchorage at Tawi Tawi. On 24 April 1944 off Indochina she was bombed by a Japanese antisubmarine aircraft, suffering shattered and flooded periscopes and loss of radar, while taking a harrowing plunge to after her main induction was improperly closed (a casualty frighteningly reminiscent of "Squalus") in diving to escape. {The "Robalo" had been seen by Japanese aircraft carrier Kaiyō while escorting convoy Hi-58; which resulted in the "Robalo" being damaged 24 April 1944 one of the ships which escaped damage from the "Robalo" was the Mayasan Maru.} On a "wildly aggressive patrol" lasting 51 days, "Robalo" fired twenty torpedoes in four attacks. In regard to the four claims by the "Robalo": 

When she returned to Fremantle, Captain "Tex" McLean (commanding Subron 16) and Admiral Christie both considered relieving "Robalo"s skipper for his own safety.

"Robalo" departed Fremantle on 22 June 1944 on her third war patrol. She set a course for the South China Sea to conduct her patrol in the vicinity of the Natuna Islands. After transiting Makassar Strait and Balabac Strait (which was well-known to be mined), she was scheduled to arrive on station about 6 July and remain until dark on 2 August 1944. On 2 July, a contact report stated "Robalo" had sighted a "Fusō"-class battleship, with air cover and two destroyers for escort, just east of Borneo. No other messages were ever received from the submarine and when she did not return from patrol, she was presumed lost.

On 2 August, a note was dropped from the window of a cell of Puerto Princesa Prison Camp on Palawan Island in the Philippines. It was picked up by an American soldier who was on a work detail nearby. The note was in turn given to H.D. Hough, Yeoman Second Class, who was also a prisoner at the camp. On 4 August, he contacted Trinidad Mendosa, wife of guerrilla leader Dr. Mendosa who furnished further information on the survivors.From these sources, it was concluded "Robalo" was sunk on 26 July 1944, off the western coast of Palawan Island from an explosion in the vicinity of her after battery, probably caused by an enemy mine. Only four men swam ashore, and made their way through the jungles to a small barrier northwest of the Puerto Princesa Prison Camp, where Japanese Military Police captured them and jailed them for guerrilla activities. On 15 August, they were evacuated by a Japanese destroyer and never heard from again. The exact fate of the 4 survivors is unknown.Even though Admiral Christie knew better it was reported for morale reasons that all hands went down with the boat. However, other prisoners on Palawan reported that the boat's skipper Lt. Cdr. Manning Kimmel, son of Admiral Husband Kimmel, was one of the survivors. After an air strike on Palawan the Japanese were so angered that they pushed Kimmel and other prisoners into a ditch poured in gasoline and burned them alive. This incident was reported by Clay Blair Jr., a submarine veteran of the war, and author of the definitive work "Silent Victory: The US Submarine War Against Japan" (see Volume 2, pp660–662 for details).[The Palawan Massacre of US Pows occurred this way-but in December-not July-1944]

"Robalo" was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 16 September 1944."Robalo" earned two battle stars for World War II service.


