Villeneuve-sur-Lot

Villeneuve-sur-Lot (Gascon: "Vilanuèva d'Olt") is a town and commune in southwestern France, in the region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine. It is a subprefecture of the Lot-et-Garonne department. The commune was formerly named "Villeneuve-d'Agen".

It is also the capital of the "arrondissement" of Villeneuve-sur-Lot and of 2 "cantons" in the department: Villeneuve-sur-Lot-1 and Villeneuve-sur-Lot-2.

The region where the city is was first populated by the Romans. In the 11th century, a Benedictine abbey was constructed near where is the city now. There was a small village of potters and farmers around the abbey. Between 1254 and 1263, Alphonse of Poitiers had a bastide built. He also gave the bastide city rights. The bastide has a rectangular look, with a central square.

Because of its privileged geographical situation on the river lot, the city played an important role in wars of the region:

The "commune" has an area of . Its average altitude is ; at the city hall, the altitude is .

Villeneuve-sur-Lot is surrounded by the "communes" Lédat, Castelnaud-de-Gratecambe, La Sauvetat-sur-Lède, Monflanquin, Savignac-sur-Leyze, Saint-Aubin, Trentels, Saint-Sylvestre-sur-Lot, Penne-d'Agenais, Hautefage-la-Tour, Pujols and Bias.

The Lot river flows through the city of Villeneuve-sur-Lot. The Lède river, a tributary of the Lot, flows through the northern part of the "commune".

The climate of Villeneuve-sur-Lot is an oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification Cfb), with mild winters and warm summers.

The inhabitants of Villeneuve-sur-Lot are known, in French, as "Villeneuvois" (women: "Villeneuvoises").

With a population of 23,263, Villeneuve-sur-Lot has a population density of inhabitants/km.
Evolution of the population in Villeneuve-sur-Lot

Villeneuve-sur-Lot is a subprefecture of the Lot-et-Garonne department since 1800. It is also the capital of the "arrondissement" of Villeneuve-sur-Lot and the administrative centre () of 2 cantons:

It is part of the intercommunality "Grand Villeneuvois" ().

Villeneuve-sur-Lot is twinned with:




