John Delaney

John Kevin Delaney (born April 16, 1963) is an American politician and businessman. He has been the United States Representative for Maryland's 6th congressional district since 2013.

On July 28, 2017, Delaney became the first Democrat to announce he is running for President in 2020.

Delaney was born in Wood-Ridge, New Jersey. His parents were Elaine Rowe and Jack Delaney, an electrician. He was raised in Wood-Ridge. He studied at Columbia University and Georgetown University Law Center. 

Delaney has co-founded two companies, both of which are publicly traded on the New York Stock Exchange. He has won the Ernst & Young Entrepreneur of the Year Award in 2004. 

In 1993, he co-founded Health Care Financial Partners, to make loans available to smaller-sized health care service providers purportedly ignored by larger banks. In 2000, Delaney co-founded CapitalSource, a commercial lender headquartered in Chevy Chase, Maryland; the company provided capital to roughly 5,000 small and mid-size businesses before his departure.

Delaney retired from his business career in 2012, to pursue a career in politics.

Delaney decided to run for the newly redrawn 6th District against 10-term Republican incumbent Roscoe Bartlett. The district had long been a Republican stronghold. 

During the primary, Delaney was endorsed by former President Bill Clinton, U.S. Congresswoman Donna Edwards, Comptroller Peter Franchot, the "Washington Post", and the "Gazette". On April 3, 2012, Delaney won the five-candidate Democratic primary field with 54% of the vote. The next closest opponent, State Senator Robert J. Garagiola, received 29% of the vote, 25 points behind Delaney.

In the November 6, 2012 general election, Delaney defeated Bartlett by 59%-38%, a 21-point margin. 

Delaney introduced legislation to end partisan gerrymandering. The Open Our Democracy Act would appoint independent redistricting commissions nationwide to end partisan gerrymandering, make Election Day a federal holiday and create an open top-two primary system. 

Delaney announced he is running for President of the United States in the 2020 presidential election in a Washington Post op-ed on July 28, 2017.

Delaney is married to April McClain and together they have four daughters. 



