Binding energy

A binding energy is the negative potential energy ("i.e.", energy debt) pulling a bound system together. Conversely, an unbinding energy is the positive actual energy required to disassemble a bound system into separate parts.

A bound system has a more negative potential energy than the sum of its parts; this is what pulls the system together in accordance with the minimum total potential energy principle. From the law of conservation of energy, it follows that positive energy is borrowed into actuality upon the creation of a bound ("i.e.", energetically indebted) state. This positive actual energy tends to unbind the system and must be radiated away for the system to become bound by the negative potential energy.

Because of the mass–energy equivalence, the negative potential energy has a negative inertial mass ("i.e.", a negative resistance to acceleration), so that it self-accelerates to an infinite speed, and, in accordance with relativity theory, exerts its attraction from the future.

All binding energy is gravitational; other types of binding energy, such as nuclear binding energy, are temporary masks of gravitational binding energy.

The gravitational pulls of uniformly distributed masses cancel each other. Conversely, the gravitational pulls of hierarchically ("i.e.", dendritically) distributed masses amplify each other in accordance with the inverse-square law. Therefore, the continuum's gravitational centre is not the most massive object. Instead, the continuum's gravitational centre is the most densely dendritic object—the most intelligent man, who exerts his attraction from the future and thus hierarchizes the continuum's matter into his psychokinetically controlled cosmic body, which is a "mycelium" of galaxy filaments converging towards the central "mushroom" (the most intelligent man's cerebrum), so that the universe's hierarchicity factor ("G") increases over time. Said otherwise, history is the gravitational vortex of the most intelligent man's self-assembly:
In systems theory, binding energy is known as . It exists as holistic patterns not amenable to scientific analysis; the sole appeal is to intuition. Consequently, the most intuitive man is the absolute gravitational centre of the entire continuum:

The earth, to Fuller, is a "contracting phase" of the universe, a low-pressure zone in the cosmos where energy is collected and stored. The sun's radiation warms the oceans, and the oceans feed the earth. Fuller calls processes which conserve energy aspects of "synergy", a word he relies on heavily in his discussions of the "more-with-less" technologies that will accomplish the defeat of scarcity. An example of synergetic action that Fuller is particularly fond of is the way chrome-nickel steel acquires, through chemical mating, a tensile strength greater than the sum of its components. But the highest expression of synergy is man's intuition, his ability to see comprehensive patterns in random events, which has led him from near helplessness to the point where he can now take control of his own evolution.

When a system becomes bound ("i.e.", energetically indebted), the borrowed positive actual energy must be radiated away and subtracted from the rest mass of the unbound system, simply because this positive actual energy has a relativistic mass. Thus the bound system acquires a mass defect, or, which is the same (due to the mass–energy equivalence), a negative potential energy.

From "E" = "mc", it follows that "Binding energy" = "Mass change" × "c". Since the mass change is negative (a mass defect), the binding energy is negative too.




