Ananta Bijoy Das

Ananta Bijoy Das (Bengali: অনন্ত বিজয় দাশ ) (1982—2015 ) was a secular blogger from Bangladesh. In February 2015, he left his house in Sylhet to go to work at a bank. Four men with masks attacked him near his house and killed him with machetes.

Das wrote about science, and he was critical of religious fundamentalism, but he was not against religion. Two other writers, Avijit Roy and Washiqur Rahman, were also killed in Bangladesh after they wrote about secular themes.

Das wrote for Avijit Roy's blog Mukto-Mona (Free Thinkers). He also was editor for a local science magazine, Jukti ("Reason"). He wrote several books, including a book about Charles Darwin.

Das was an activist in Ganajagaran Mancha, a group that wanted to end Islamist parties. He was also the head of the Science and Rationalist Council.

In 2005, Das organized a small group of free-thinkers in Sylhet. Most of them were students of Shahjalal University of Science and Technology. They organized study groups, translated books into Bengali, and wrote essays. they talked about science, pseudo-science, religion, sexuality, politics, and world history.

Many people were not happy about the free-thinkers. Homeopathy practitioners wanted to sue them. Many people were unhappy about their essays critical of Hinduism. Others were not happy about their talk of sexuality, a taboo subject in Bangladesh. Das's book about the Soviet Union made the leftists unhappy. The Islamist students of the science and technology university were very unhappy.

According to Reporters Without Borders, a group called Defenders of Islam wrote a "hit list" of bloggers. There were 84 names on the list. Eight of the 84 bloggers are now dead. After the attack on Avijit Roy, Das received more threats about his writing. In March 2015, Ananta was on a new hit list of a group called Ansarullah Bangla Team, and he wrote to the IHEU, "“It seems to me I am one of the targets . I am not sure how long I will hide myself. But I am sure If they will find me they will do what they did with Mr. Avijit Roy. My life is seriously unsecured . I am not sure how can I protect myself & my family." 

When some people attacked Asif Mohiuddin's house, Mohiuddin tried to help Das get out of the country. Mohiuddin helped him with his papers and gave them to some organizations to get him out. Mohiuddin was attacked in 2013, and was able to get out of the country.

Das planned to visit Sweden in May 2015, for World Press Freedom Day. The Swedish chapter of PEN, an international writers group, invited him. The Swedish Embassy in Dhaka refused the visa. They said he might try to stay in Sweden. Ananta Bijoy Das and another author translated the book "Am I a Monkey?: Six Big Questions About Evolution" by Spanish-American evolutionary biologist and philosopher Francisco J. Ayala into Bengali. A few months after Das was murdered, the other writer was able to get to Sweden.

Das died at the age of 32 on May 12, 2016. The next day, secularists marched in the city of Sylhet to protest his death.

In August 2015, Bangladeshi police arrested three men for the murder of Das and Avijit Roy. Al-Qaeda in the Indian Subcontinent (AQIS), posted a video on an extremist website saying they were responsible for the death of Avijit Roy and others. The video said their leader ordered the deaths. The police in Bangladesh said it was probably a local group called Ansarullah Bangla Team with about 100 members.

In 2006, the blog Mukto-Mona gave Das their "Rationalist Award".




