Lego Ninjago: Masters of Spinjitzu

Ninjago:Masters of Spinjitzu is an American animated television series that focuses on the adventures of six ninja : Kai, Zane, Jay, Lloyd (as of season 2), Cole, & Nya (as of season 5). It is a spin-off based on the popular brick building toy, Lego. 

The setting of the series is in the land of Ninjago. Ninjago was created by the first Spinjitzu Master (Sensei Wu and Garmadon's father) using The Four Golden Weapons of Spinjitzu. When the First Spinjitzu Master died he gave the weapons to his son Wu (because Garmadon was implanted with evil by the Great Devourer). Garmadon wanted to take the weapons for himself, but Wu gave it to four Ninja to protect the weapons, which are Kai: the red ninja of fire, Jay:the blue Ninja of Lightning, Zane:the white Ninja of Ice and Cole: the black Ninja of Earth. At the time Jay develops romantic feelings for Nya (Kai's sister)

-Note : Spinjitzu is a fighting technique and has the form of a spinning tornado

-Note : The Four Golden Weapons are The Dragon sword of Fire, The Nunchunks of lightning, the shurikens of ice & the scythe of Earth

Season 1 focuses on the Ninja (Kai, Jay, Cole and Zane) fighting to determine whose the green Ninja (a ninja who is destined to fight the evil Lord Garmadon). Sensei Wu is struggling to maintain and teach his Ninja students. On the other hand, Lloyd Garmadon (the son of Lord Garmadon) accidentally releases the serpentine army to attack the ninja. Pythor is the main villain of season 1 & his main goal is to get all the blades to free his master 'The Devourer', so he can get destroy Ninjago city. Pythor is consumed by the Devourer, and the Devourer is destroyed by evil Garmadon (who uses the golden weapons), & later on steals the Golden Weapons. Also it was revealed that Lloyd (whose life was saved by Kai, due to his true potential) is the green ninja. And everything goes out of hand when a son has to fight his father. 

Season 2 focuses on the Ninja trying to train Lloyd for the ultimate battle. On the other hand, Lord Garmadon uses the Mega Weapon ( a combination of the four golden weapons) for evil purposes. The Ninja are turned into children but are turned back to normal at the price of Lloyd losing his youth and becomes older. Lord Garmadon releases the Stone Army, due to the command of the OverLord. The ultimate battle begins, but Lloyd loses. On the second round the OverLord possesses Garmadon, claiming that Ninjago was never Garmadon's but he's. Lloyd becomes the Ultimate Spinjitzu master and defeats the OverLord, restoring Ninjago back to its good, original form, and destroying all Garmadon's evil, : turning him back to normal. 

Season 3 focuses on the Ninja leaving in "New Ninjago City" (an update of original Ninjago city, a metropolis with multiple skyscrapers and advanced technology) and striving for action. At the time the Ninja find out that the OverLord is alive, & rebuilt himself into the Digiverse. The Ninja are given the Technoblades by 'Borg' (the creator of Borg Industries and the designer for New Ninjago City) which is the weakness for the OverLord. The OverLord infects every Android machine and robot with evil, including his Nindroid army. On the other hand, Jay is angry and jealous when it is revealed that Cole is Nya's love match, & for the entire season Jay and Cole fight. On the other hand, Garmadon is training Lloyd, at the point where Pythor is back and captures Lloyd for the OverLord to suck all his golden power so he can become the physical. When Lloyd is free he only has 10% of his golden power, which is divided to give the Ninja their elemental powers. The OverLord with his helper Pythor and launch Codename: Arcturus (the plan for them to get the golden weapons from space to make the OverLord become the Golden Master). The Nindroids go to space to get the Golden Weapons, but are privately followed by the Ninja. When they land on the asteroid, the nindroids get the Golden Weapons and fly back to Earth leaving the Ninja with a destroyed rocket ship. The Ninja use their powers to rebuild the rocket and fly back to Earth. The OverLord becomes the Golden Master, but is finally destroyed by Zane (who risks his life). And they have a sad memorial of Zane's bravery

On season 4 the Ninja are split due to Zane's sacrifice, But are reunited by Lloyd. The ninja participate in "The Tournament of Elements" hosted by Master Chen when they get the news that Zane is alive. They participate in the tournament with 12 other masters Skylor (master of absorption), Griffin Turner (master of speed), Invizable Man (master of light), Chamille (master of form), Ash (master of smoke), Bolobo (master of nature), Gravitec (master of gravity), Neuro (master of mind), Tox (master of poison), Shadow (master of shadow), Carlof (master of metal) & Jacob (master of sound). In the Tournament Kai falls in love with Skylor, & becomes Carlof's enemy (as they fight constantly in Episode 36 & 37). After many battles all the masters start to realize that when someone loses Chen uses his staff of elements to suck their powers for a transformation spell, which is performed by Clause (Chen's number 2, and a sorcerer). The spell makes everybody with the Andacondrai mark become an Andacondrai. The Andacondrai mark spot people include Chen himself, Clause, Garmadon (who was revealed to be Chen's student), Skylor (who was revealed to be Chen's spy), & every other Andacondrai wannabes. The transformation was not complete, and to complete it they'll need the saliva of a true Andacondrai (which was tiny Pythor in jail). When they took Pythor and complete the transformation, on the other hand, every elemental master has discovered all their elemental dragons. They fight all the Andacondrai wannabes. And the Andacondrai wannabes are sucked into the cursed realm, which leads to Garmadon sacrificing himself to be sucked into the cursed realm so he can unleash the Andacondrai spirits to curse Chen's army. At the end of season 4 Morro is accidentally freed from the cursed realm. 

Season 5 focuses on the Ninja fighting the ghost Morro (the master of wind and Sensei Wu's first student), Morro possesses Lloyd for most of the season. When Morro possesses Lloyd, the ninja lose their powers (for more than 3.5 quarters of the season) and use aeroblades for most of the season. Morro unleashes a variety of ghost warriors (ghosts) & his mission is to find the realm crystal (a realm that can let its user travel through the 16 realms), & free his master, " The Preeminent" (the physical body of the cursed realm) so she can curse all 16 realms. On the other hand, Nya is revealed to be the Water Ninja, as she is being trained by Sensei Wu. The Ninja and Morro struggle as they go through journeys to master Airjitzu (a Spinjitzu that can fly) to get the Sword of Sanctuary (a sword that can show the user the opponent's next move), and find the Realm Crystal. At the end of Season 5, Lloyd is free and fights with Morro, at the end Nya unlocks her true potential and destroys the Preeminent, with the cost of Morro dying. (note: the weakness of a ghost is water or deep stone [the aeroblades] ).

Season 6 focuses on the Ninja being famous, but is disrupted when Clause (as a ghost) frees Nadakhan the Djinn (a djinn that grants you three wishes but on the third one, he captures you in the Djinn blade). The whole season focuses on the ninja (mainly Jay) fighting Nadakhan's skypirates. Nadakhan's mission is to be married to Nya (because Nya looks like Delara:Nadakhan's love) so he can get infinite wishes. All the Ninja are captured but except for Jay/Nya. Nadakhan gets Infinite wishes but is stopped when Jay wishes that "nobody ever found the teapot and that Nya took his hand". This destroys the timeline of Nadakhan being free & reunites Jay and Nya's relationship.

Season 7 focuses on The Ninja against The Time Twins. The Time Twins are the elemental masters of time from long time ago, during the Anacondrai wars. Long time ago Wu and Garmadon fought with the time twins and banish them using the Time Blade. The Time Blade is the main weapon that the twins control (there are 2 Time Blades). The Time Twins than return to the present to get revenge. Acronix and Acrux (the hands of time/ the time twins) than team up and create the Vermilion Army (snake-like living bodies who can regenerate). The Ninja have a tough time against the Vermilion Army. It is than revealed that Kai and Nya's parents (Ray and Maya) were traitors and worked for the time twins. One evidence is revealed later on that Ray and Maya are the ones who created The Time Blades.

Note : Season 7 of Ninjago (Hands of Time) has finished airing yet and has not premiered at America yet?
So the information of the season is not fully complete. Season 7 started at episode 65 and airing is currently at episode 69. Premiere at USA begins at May 15 , premiere at Africa began at April 8, and premiere at UK began at April 1st.

The series had a huge success and has the rating of 4.6 out of 5 and 92% out of 100%. The series plays in Cartoon Network. The series is watched by 4.7 million per day. The series is naturally named 'Lego Ninjago:Masters of Spinjitzu' but is called 'Ninjago' by fans or viewers. Ninjago:Masters of Spinjitzu is distributed by Lego and is produced by WiFilm.



