Politics of the Netherlands

The politics of the Netherlands is that of a indirect democracy. It has a constitution and a monarchy that operates within the constitution. The democratic structure is determined by a parliament (the legislative branch) and a government (the executive branch). The government depends on the confidence of the parliament, but the two branches aren't strictly separated (the parliamentary system).

The parliament is called the States General (Dutch: "Staten-Generaal") and consists of two chambers: a lower house, the so-called Second Chamber (Dutch: "Tweede Kamer"), comparable with the House of Representatives in other countries, and a upper house, the so-called First Chamber (Dutch: "Eerste Kamer"), comparable with the Senate in other countries, and often called likewise.

At a lower level, there are provinces, municipalities and water boards.

On a higher level, the Netherlands makes part of the Benelux, Council of Europe, European Union, NATO and the United Nations.

The Netherlands is officially called the "Kingdom of the Netherlands". It is composed of four countries: the Netherlands itself (the European part) and three island countries in the Caribbean: Aruba, Curaçao and Saint Martin. Three other islands in the Caribbean that belong to the Netherlands have a status of special municipalities of the Netherlands, the so-called Caribbean Netherlands.

Current government is the Second Rutte cabinet, a coalition of the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD, a conservative liberal party) and the Labour Party (PvdA, a social democratic party). 

The Second Rutte Cabinet was established in 2012. Prime Minister has been VVD politician Mark Rutte since 2010.

The following 13 political parties are in parliament:


No more in parliament:

The most recent general elections were held on Wednesday March 15, 2017. When the results were announced, the Labour Party (PvdA) lost many seats, while the winner, the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) led by Mark Rutte, also lost seats, but not as many.

Most of the opposition parties won seats. The populist Party for Freedom (PVV) of Geert Wilders didn't win as many seats as were expected of them, but they became second in the number of seats they had. More seats were won by (especially) GreenLeft (GL), Democrats 66 (D66), the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), the Party for the Animals (PvdD), and 50PLUS (50+), along with the newly formed parties DENK and Forum for Democracy (FvD). The only other party to lose seats was the Socialist Party (SP), while the small Christian parties ChristianUnion (CU) and Reformed Political Party (SGP) did not gain or lose any seats.

Seats in post-war Second Chamber ("Tweede Kamer").
Coalitian parties marked in olive.
Prime Minister's party in bold.

Political leaders sorted by the number of seats in parliament.




