Emídio Brasileiro

Emídio Silva Falcão Brasileiro (born 19 February 1962) is a Brazilian writer, lawyer research, teacher, lawyer and orator.

Emídio Brasileiro was born in Irará. His father owned a pharmacy in Irará-Bahia-Brazil. His mother is nurse and currently works as a volunteer in charitable works spiritists Maria Dolores, in Salvador, Bahia capital. 

Since childhood, Brasileiro got interested in religious affairs. He was assistant from Catholic Masses, when participated in all activities of the Church in his hometown. In 1971, met spiritism because of illness, spiritual in nature, suffered by his brother. Studied the Spiritist doctrine and participated in the activities of Spiritist Center "A Caminho da Luz", in Irará, founded on 19 January 1948 by José Raphael Carvalho, Elysio Sant'anna e Aristóteles Peixinho. 

From 1975, he delivered his first lecture spirit out of his hometown, the city of Riachão do Jacuípe, initiated the dissemination of Spiritism in several cities of the State of Bahia. 

In 1978, he began to live in Salvador, capital of Bahia, where he was living with his maternal grandmother Elza Alves da Silva, to continue with his studies, entering through vestibular, Technical School Federal da Bahia – ETFBa, current IFBA. During the period when he lived in Salvador, participated in the activities of Spiritist Center Caminho da Redenção and Mansão do Caminho. 

In 1982 he completed the course of "Technician in Electronics" on ETFBa, and 1. December of that year, joined by means of competition, the Brazilian Telecommunications Company (Embratel), where he exercised the function of technician at telecommunications. 

From 1985 he started the dissemination of Spiritism in Brazil and abroad with its first trip, lectured on associations and spiritist centers in various cities of Belém do Pará, São Luís do Maranhão, Teresina, Fortaleza, Natal, João Pessoa, Recife, Maceió, Aracaju, Salvador, Vitória, Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo. 

In 1986, moved up by Embratel, to Goiânia with the objective of completing their studies, because in Salvador there was an opportunity to reconcile work with studies due to successive trips by Embratel. 

From 1987, in Goiânia, starts his career as a writer, works with spiritual and didactic, a lawyer in teaching in higher and advocacy, and researcher in the area of behavior, becoming known and respected by many institutions spiritists, institutions of higher education and vehicles of communication in Brazil and abroad. 

In 1990, he married Marislei de Sousa Espíndula Brasileiro, currently nurse, writer, academic, researcher, university professor, master of nursing, PhD in Health Sciences (Federal University of Goiás) and Science of religion (Catholic University of Goiás) with who has a couple of children.

Graduated in law by the Universidade Federal de Goiás, lawyer, specializing in Educational Planning by Salgado University of Oliveira (Rio de Janeiro), Master in Science Education by Lusophone University of Humanities and Technology (Lisbon), PhD in law from the Autonomous University of Lisbon. He is currently professor of law at the Catholic University of Goiás, among other colleges.

Emídio Brasileiro was responsible for a research on sexual behavior of the Brazilian population in 1994. The works "Sex Education" and "Sex, problems and solutions" include 1378 questions and answers about human sexuality. After their release, the
Legislative Assembly of the State of Goiás established sex education in state schools in Goiás, as a discipline or as a key theme in the mandatory grade of Sciences. This initiative was the first milestone in Brazil to the public and private schools realize the importance of the subject for young people and children in high school and elementary school. 

In 2008, Brasileiro completed a survey on the emotional behavior of the Brazilian population, which also had repercussions nationwide. This research involved some members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goiás to make a bill establishing the Emotional Education in state schools from 2010.

In his doctoral thesis, prepared under the guidance of the Autonomous University of Lisbon, Emídio Brasileiro claimed, making an analogy with the physics and the laws of Isaac Newton, that there is a law of action and reaction in physics there is also a law of action and reaction in the natural law. 

Emídio Brasileiro is author of several works spiritists and didactic. His first book, "Um dia em Jerusalém" ("A day in Jerusalem"), was written in 1987 and published in 1988 in Goiânia, with repercussions in Brazil and abroad, being translated into Spanish and Italian. 

He is the creator and founder of the first academy of letters spirit: the Spiritist Academy of Letters of the State of Goiás. Brasilerio is also the founder of the Academy of Letters Goianiense, the city of Goiânia; he is also a member of the Academy of letters of Aparecida de Goiânia, the Brazilian Union of Writers, the Press Association Goiana, among the others. 

He is currently professor of law at the Universidade Paulista UNIP, Goiânia campus, Catholic University of Goiás, among other colleges. 





