Avrum Burstein

Avraham Leib "Avrum" Burstein, Hebrew: אברהם לייב בורשטיין , (born November 1971) is an Israeli musician, actor and imparter of the legacy of authentic Klezmer, and a founder of Jerusalem Klezmer association. 

Burstein was born in Katamon, a neighborhood of Jerusalem.

He is married, a father of three boys and two girls, and a grandfather to a granddaughter.

His father, Chaim son of Rabbi Moshe Burstein the late, born in Pultusk, Poland, who immigrated to Israel in 1934, raised a family, which numbered during his lifetime nearly a thousand descendants in Israel and abroad, and was a co-founder of the Bratslav Hasidim synagogues in Jerusalem.

is mother, Bracha from the house of Mandel, was born in the village Patterson, NY- a neighborhood of Jewish immigrants who arrived from Germany on the eye of World War 2.

The families of Burstein and Mandel include creators and artists, among them the actors Pesach (Paul) Burstein and his son , and film director Barry Mendel.

At the age of 19, he married Miriam Rubinstein, the granddaughter of one of the influential Bratslav Hasidim, Rabbi Elazar Mordechai Rubinstein the late. Before the death of Rabbi Rubinstein, his Rabbi, Rabbi Eliezer Berland, ordered to document and record the grandfather who composed dozens of traditional tunes with emotion and revival in the Yiddish language, as well as melodies and prayer formulas he received from the Bratslav elders, and preserved them over the years. Burstein, on the advice of his Rabbi, fearing though the melodies become extinct, duplicated the recordings and distributed them to all of the Hasidim, melodies who became over the years the pantheon of the Bratslav Hasidim.

In 1990, young Burstein began to train youth who showed a musical talent of expressing Klezmer melodies, in order to continue the tradition of the original Klezmer music, as he received in a frontal way of means, from famous clarinet artists Dov Taras, and Gershon Kletzkin. The clarinet musicians and Nathan Coral, aged 16, who became hit musicians in the orthodox and national-religious sector during the 90's, started their training under Burstein's directing and with him, and together they producer albums with Klezmer and soul music, in order to preserve the melodies, their character and their heritage.

In 1992, he founded the youth groups "Karroubi HaNahal" in Jerusalem, for children and teenagers of the Bratslav Hasidim who came from other sectors, some of them boys to penitents' parents. In this framework, Burstein also made a point to bequeath to future generations the Jewish melody, by means of singing and music, among other activities on duty, some of them during outings with the youth to the countryside.

In 1993, for the first time in the history of the Bratslav Hasidim, Burstein records the songs and melodies of the Days of Awe of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, who passed through a tradition from the students of Rabbi Israel Baal Shem Tov, and been kept by the Bratslav Hasidim for about 200 years. For the recordings, Burstein provided Rabbi Shraga Levy, who serves since 1992 as a prayer leader (cantor) in the prayers of Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur of the Bartslav Hasidim, in the kibbutz in Jerusalem and in Uman.

These recordings have become bestsellers and with a broad impact on the Bratslav Hasidim communities in Israel and abroad. They provide a way in which Hasidic people and the newly approaching to the religion could become familiar with the wording of the founder of the Bratslav Hasidim, Rabbi Israel Baal Shem Tov and , and their students in Poland and Ukraine in the 18 century.

In 1995, Burstein recorded and produced the first albums recorded on tape reels. The first album was called "Labadik" (cheerfulness, in Yiddish). The first tape passes a fresh and pulsating breeze of the traditional Klezmer, which did not receive representation in the Academy by means of musical notes or formal courses, but learned and purchased within a tradition passed down from father to son, and from Klezmer musicians to their students for centuries.

In 1997, he recorded the first album of the clarinetist Yechiel (Hilik) Frank, "Inside the Walls". That year, Frank married Burstein's sister, Sarah.

Over those years, Burstein brought together talented youth, and among their musical activities, they used to have a weekly, Saturday night "Melaveh Malkah" diner, with traditional songs and dances. This custom existed for 15 years in a row, since 1990 to 2006. From these frameworks emerged the future Klezmer artists, like the virtuoso player Nachman Zucker, the clarinet players David Golan and Abraham Balti, the violinist Shim'on (Shimi) Vaitzhlndr, the guitarist Nachman Driiar- also a second-generation of the Bratslav Hasidim.

The group that rallied around Burstein spent many hours training and publishing albums in the spirit of Klezmer and the Jewish melody, among them: "Midnight Amendment", "Dance", "the Jewish Melody", "Soul Melodies", "Braslav Hanukkah and Purim Songs", "Joyful Song of Rosh Hashanah", "Grace of the Lord" and more.

In 1993, Klezmer artists led by Burstein went to the Klezmer Festival in Zefat, among them clarinetist Gershon Kletzkin and Rabbi Shmuel Stern, who later wrote books about the relationship between the Jewish tune and the worship of God according to the Hasidic thought and the Kabbalah. At that time, the Jerusalem Klezmer musicians began to expand their performances and leave to appear on stages abroad. Those performances stood out in their unique style, in which young Hasidic men played and danced decorated in wigs, caps and tassels, to Jewish and non-Jewish locals alike. Among the outstanding performances in those years, were performances in Krakow, Poland and in Barcelona, Spain, where the local audiences was first introduced to the authentic tune of the Members of the Old settlement in Jerusalem.

In 2001, Burstein won the musical competition held in the television program "Made in Israel" on the state broadcaster, where they climbed to the top and received a first place award.

The "main Joy" of the tens of thousands in the town of Uman, near the grave of Rabbi Nachman of Bratslav, is a tradition that was organized half a century ago, since the fall of the Soviet Union. Burstein founded this tradition, with an emphasis on klezmer and traditionally Hasidic melody, while making sure that no modern melody will ever be played atop that stage.

At Lag B'Omer, the Jewish largest day of celebration of the author of the book "Zohar", Rabbi Shimon Bar Yochai, at mount "Meron", which thousands of people celebrate each year, the main stage is led throughout the day by Burstein's students and the graduates' of "the Klezmer Association".

In 1999, Burstein founded the center for Jewish music "Judaism and singing", in the bohemian street "Sheinkin" in Tel Aviv. Spontaneous concerts of Jewish music took place there, and every Thursday, a "Kabbalat Shabbat" took place, led by the singer and songwriter Yitzhak Fox.

In 2005, Burstein founded the "Jerusalem Klezmer Association".

In 2007, Burstein founded the "Klezmer on Foot" parade, a parade of Klezmer musicians and dancers, which takes place during Passover and sukkot, starting at Yemin Moshe neighborhood, via Hutsot HaYotser and around the walls of Old Jerusalem to the tomb of King David on Mount Zion- a symbolic finish to the one considered the generator of Jewish poetry. The parade includes the maestro Giora Feidman, Hilik Frank and the rest of the graduates and students of Burstein, joined by musicians and dancers from other frameworks. Townspeople, tourists and lovers of Klezmer from all circles and communities join this parade.

In 2008, Burstein expends the annual performances and establishes the first Klezmer Festival in Jerusalem, attended be esteemed musicians in the genre, such as Moshe (Musa) Berlin, Hilik Frank, Urit Orbach from the band "Women of Eve", Mirel Reznik. The festival puts emphasis on the fact that the rest of the festivals called "Klezmer" abandoned the authentic Klezmer in favor of art from other styles. Burstein also makes sure to bring to the light the fact that Jerusalem is the capital of klezmer, in the historical aspect and through the fact that more than 50 klezmer artists live and are active in the city and its suburbs.

The same year he publishes the booklet "Klezmer Soul" that contains the musical notes and explanations of dozens of Klezmer melodies and stories of the Jewish town, accompanied by photos of the klezmer past and present. The booklet is distributed in six languages: Hebrew, Yiddish, English, German, French and Russian.

Since 2010, Burstein puts on a weekly occurrence, the "Klezmer Tish": a "Melaveh Malkah" show, that takes place in Jerusalem's "Hkrtz'ma of Burstein" (the basement of the former library, "Yung Yiddish"), founded by Mendy Cahan, who occasionally comes to perform there.

Since 2009, each year during the Days of Awe between Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur, Burstein and his graduates, the klezmer musicians, travel to cities in Europe, and in this framework they play music, present and bring to the stage the culture of the Jewish shtetl (Jewish town), the Jewish prayers and Klezmer. Performances in the overseas communities receive a broad documentation in the local media and is very popular, even among local nations.

Burstein, also known at his performing and acting skills, among them plays in practice to the stories of "Shalom Aleichem", was chosen by the producers of the educational series "KiKa" In Germany to a leading role, along with some of his students. The series, "Search of God", part of which was filmed in Jerusalem, documents searching for God in three the world's major religions (Islam, Christianity and Judaism).

In 2011, Burstein and some of his graduates were chosen to play in key roles in the first place winning series "Shtisl" from "Hot". In other episodes, they are used as escorting musicians.

In the same year, "the Klezmer Association" won the second place prize in the nationwide Klezmer contest in Israel on behalf of the Tel Aviv municipality.

In 2013, Burstein and his students are chosen as "the commendable of the cultural basket", following the show "The Story of Klezmer" that was written by Ofer Schneider, who is a music teacher from the Ministry of Education and advocates for the enrichment of musical knowledge of the artists association.

In 2014, Burstein founded the "Klezmer Annual Conference", in the collage "Emuna" in Jerusalem, attended by clarinet musicians Giora Feidman, Musa Berlin, Hilik Frank, Hanan Bar Sela, Urit Orbach and more. In 2015, the second conference took place in a larger format in the Hall of Solomon in Jerusalem.

At Hanukkah 2014, Burstein gets the responsibility for the musical and visual accompaniment at the International Bible Contest for Adults on behalf of the Ministry of Education, with the participation of Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and Deputy Minister of Education Avi Wortzman. After the Chanukah candle lighting, Burstein preformed the song "If I Were a Rich Man" from the play "Tevye" written by the Jewish writer Shalom Aleichem - a play that relates the biblical Jewish heritage and Jewish life in exile.

On this occasion, Burstein and his students gave the decoration of "the Darling of the Jerusalem Klezmer" to the Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and his wife Sara. The Prime Minister promised to promote the status of Jerusalem as the capital of the klezmer world.



