Museo de Arte Moderno y Contemporáneo de Santander y Cantabria

The Museum de Arte Moderno y Contemporáneo de Santander y Cantabria (MAS) is an art museum located in Santander, Spain.

MAS has been important in developing and collecting modernist art, and is often identified as one of the largest and most influential museums of modern art in the Spain.

MAS's collection offers an overview of modern and contemporary art, including works of drawing, painting, sculpture, photography.

MAS, of municipal ownership, was founded in 1907 and inaugurated on February 6, 1908 thanks to the effort and sensitivity of its mayor Luis Martínez Fernández under the nomenclature of Municipal Library and Museum. The Museum was born and developed according to concepts of the time, a generalist museum organized in different sections (Prehistory and Archeology, Natural History, Ethnography and Ethnology, and finally Fine Arts), with pieces and works from numerous donations of local essence And regional, located in its beginning in a room of the own City council of Santander. In fact, the museum was a section of the Municipal Library. In 1923 it was moved to the last floor of the new building (the current MAS building), designed in 1918 by Leonardo Rucabado, a building designed to be a Municipal Library - never for museums - and completed in 1923, a historicist and eclectic architecture In the city center.
Of donations of individuals of the city and of some few acquisitions always relative to artists of Santander and Cantabria. Simón Cabarga, with his work and dedication, was a fundamental person in the specialization of the local and regional art museum, a small and peripheral museum always fragile and delicate in its presences and absences.

The permanent collection in public exhibition (expo collection) has more than 250 works, both modern art: María Blanchard, Pancho Cossío, Rogelio de Egusquiza, Francisco de Goya, José Gutiérrez Solana, Carlos de Haes, Francisco Iturrino, Roberto Balbuena, Cristino Mallo, Joan Miró, Jorge Oteiza, Antonio Quirós, Manuel G. Raba, Agustín de Riancho, Julio Romero de Torres, Casimiro Sainz, etc.,- como de arte contemporáneo y actual, que suponen el grueso de la colección, con piezas de Ignasi Aballí, Javier Arce, Carlos Aires, Manu Arregui, Miriam Bäckström, Rosalía Banet, Gabriele Basilico, Fernando Bermejo, Richard Billingham, Sergei Bratkov, Daniele Buetti, Catarina Campino, Nuria Canal, Josefina Carón, Naia del Castillo, Vicky Civera, Magdalena Correa, Nicola Costantino, José Pedro Croft, Adrián Cuervo, Stephen Dean, Tacita Dean, Salvador Díaz, Juan Carlos Fernández Izquierdo, Roland Fischer, Esteban de la Foz, Daniel & Geo Fuchs, Hamish Fulton, Regina Jose Galindo, José Gallego, Mads Gamdrup, Concha García, Cristina García Rodero, Nam Goldin, Pierre Gonnord, Luis González Palma, Emilio González Sainz, Luis Gordillo, Eduardo Gruber, Jesús Hidalgo, Pablo Hojas,  Stephan Huber, Axel Hütte, Aldo Iacobelli, Alfredo Jaar, Berta Jayo, Isaac Julien, Aino Kannisto, Eva Koch, José Lamarca, Miki Leal, Juan López, Jose Lourenço,  Cristina Lucas, Chelo Matesanz, José Luis Mazarío, Adrián Melis, José Mª Mellado, Yasumasa Morimura, Bet Moyses, Vik Muniz, Ana Llorens, Momu & No Es, Paloma Navares, Fernando Navarro, Juan Navarro Baldeweg, Bjargey Ólafsdóttir, Tony Oursler, Umberto Pettinicchio, Ester Partegás, Concha Pérez, Jaume Plensa, Zaira Rasillo, Tobias Rehberger, Mario Rey, Rax Rinnekangas, George Rousse, Santiago Sierra, Tony Stubbing, Baltazar Torres, Emilia Trueba, Juan Uslé, Vicky Uslé, Florence Vaisberg, Eulàlia Valldosera, Irene van de Mheen, Ian Wallace, Tim White, etc.

The most important collection is that of paintings and sculptures of centuries between the 16th and the 20th, of Italy, Flanders and Spain. Among the Spanish artists abound prestigious kantabroj in a field of fine arts. In addition to the changing exhibitions, the collection of the museum generally encompasses 1870 articles.



CARRETERO REBÉS, S.: “Museos y colecciones. El Museo Municipal de Bellas Artes de Santander”. En Catálogo del Patrimonio Cultural de Cantabria III. Santander y su entorno de AA.VV., pp. 437-476. Santander, 2002.
Ediciones MAS / Relación (Vid.).



