Mighty Magiswords (International TV Series)

Mighty Magiswords is an French-German-Italian animation series produced by Alphanim and Nickelodeon Productions, and distributed by Nelvana, Discovery Kids and Globosat.

The series deals with the two light warriors, Prohyas and Vambre, with their dragon pet Gulp, go on adventures with their magiswords and the powerful imagination of the twins who was carefree and stayed with him. With Gulp, an anthropomorphic dragon that is the pet of Prohyas and Vambre.

In May 2005, the series was first broadcast in Jetix Germany and Nickelodeon Germany on the German worlds, and then was devoted to another in Jetix France, Jetix Italy, Nickelodeon Italy and Nickelodeon France.

In July 2006, the series was broadcast on Nickelodeon Latin America until 2009. In 2007, it was aired on Jetix Latin America through 2008 through the Jetix Original series. The series introduces the producer before inviting Jetix Animation Concepts, a 2006-2009 company that was produced by Yin Yang Yo, Get Ed and Super Robot Monkey Team Hyperforce Go.

During episodes, the series has three seasons and episodes with five episodes each season.

'Robin's Tales' " was the end of an hour of the series issued on May 1, 2009, and its sequel " Robin's Halloween Debuts " was the other end of an hour of the series was issued on 4 September 2010. His two last episodes are characterized first, Steven and the Titans with the Army Robin has discovered stealing his evil man, and in the second and final adventure continues with a special Halloween during the October season , Everyone has halloween, and then Steven and Connie love and have to leave the adventures through the final door during the Halloween extremes.

During the last five years, to his farewell messages

" Powerful Magistrates, 2005-2010 "

After five years, Alphanim canceled new seasons and new five episodes during the total of 5x5 episodes. When Jetix replaced by Disney XD, Disney XD eliminated the series, and Disney XD was emitted the series currently in Europe.




