Rocky De La Fuente

Roque "Rocky" De La Fuente (born October 10, 1954) is an American businessman, political activist, and politician.

He was the unsuccessful nominee of the Reform Party and that of his self-created American Delta Party for President of the United States in the 2016 election. De La Fuente was an unsuccessful candidate for the Democratic nomination in Florida's 2016 election for United States Senator and for the Democratic presidential nomination in the 2016 primaries.

De La Fuente was born to Roque Antonio De La Fuente Alexander and Bertha Guerra Yzaguirre on October 10, 1954 in San Diego, California. He studied at National Autonomous University of Mexico and studied Accounting & Business Administration at Anahuac University.

Between 1976 and 1990, De La Fuente had bought automobile dealerships from Alfa Romeo, American Motor Corporation, Audi, Cadillac, Chrysler, Daihatsu, Dodge, GMC, Honda, and others.

In 2004, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation issued an order barring De La Fuente from participating in an FDIC-insured institution. De La Fuente went to court and the case was resolved.

He owns businesses and properties in the Dominican Republic, Mexico, United States, and Uruguay.

De La Fuente ran a presidential campaign in the 2016 election. De La Fuente sought the Democratic Party's nomination during their presidential primaries. De La Fuente's campaign did not win a single primary or a single delegate to the 2016 Democratic National Convention.

De La Fuente founded the American Delta Party and ran as that party's nominee with his running mate Michael Steinberg and was nominated as the presidential candidate of the Reform Party which had ballot access in Florida, Kentucky, Louisiana, Minnesota and Mississippi.

On June 20, 2016, De La Fuente paid the $10,440 qualifying fee to run for the Democratic nomination of the 2016 Senate election in Florida to decide the Democratic nominee for the Senate seat occupied by Republican Marco Rubio. He competed with Patrick Murphy, Alan Grayson, Pam Keith, and Reginald Luster for the nomination. Murphy won the nomination; De La Fuente came in fourth-place out of five candidates, receiving 60,606 votes (5.38% of the overall vote).

On January 9, 2017, De La Fuente announced his plans to run for president again for the Democratic nomination in 2020.



