Rogue One

Rogue One: A Star Wars Story (or just Rogue One) is an American epic space opera movie. It was released around the world in December 2016. A Lucasfilm movie, it is directed by Gareth Edwards. It was written by Chris Weitz and Tony Gilroy with the story by John Knoll and Gary Whitta. The film stars Felicity Jones, Diego Luna, Ben Mendelsohn, Donnie Yen, Mads Mikkelsen, Alan Tudyk, Jiang Wen and Forest Whitaker.

It is the first movie in the "Star Wars" anthology series. The story follows Jyn Erso, daughter of the unwilling designer of the Galactic Empire's super-weapon the Death Star. Her mission is to get the diagram so it can be destroyed.

James Dyer of Empire Magazine gave the film 4 stars, saying "The ultimate Star Wars fan film, it's short on whimsy but when it gets going there's enough risk-taking and spectacle to bode well for future standalones". Amy Nicholson of MTV gave the film a C-, saying "Audiences once packed theaters to gawk at the future; now, it's to soak in the past. The emphasis is on packing in as much nostalgia as possible and tersely editing it together to resemble a film". IGN's Eric Goldman gave the film a 9/10, stating "The film offers a remarkable recreation of the original Star Wars' world, while exploring this universe from a different, edgier perspective than is the norm". Matthew Pejkovic of Matt's Movie Reviews scored the film a 4/5, saying "Earns its intergalactic stripes as a Star Wars spin-off of visual gumption and gritty action filmmaking, securing its place as the glue between trilogies in this ever expanding space saga". Mark Dujsik of Mark Reviews Movies gave the film a 2/4, stating "We're used to the characters in this series existing primarily as archetypes. The characters here, though, barely qualify as archetypes".

TheWrap's Alonso Duralde stated ""Rogue One: A Star Wars Story" is for the fans, all right, but in that expression's worst way". Caillou Pettis of Caillou Pettis Movie Reviews scored the film an A, and stated "Rogue One is another epic installment in the saga we have all adored since 1977".



