La La Land (movie)

La La Land is a 2016 American romantic musical comedy-drama movie. Its title is a reference to the nickname for the city of Los Angeles. It is also an idiom for being out of touch with reality.

On a crowded Los Angeles highway, an aspiring actress named Mia is distracted by her preparation for an upcoming audition. That leads to a moment of road rage between her and a pianist named Sebastian. Her audition is yet another failure. At the same time, Sebastian is having a problem paying his bills. This leads to an argument with his sister, Laura. Mia's car is towed. She has to walk back to her apartment.

Sebastian is told by the owner of a restaurant not to play any jazz. Instead, he plays simple variations of Christmas songs. But he begins a heartfelt improvisation at the restaurant. Mia overhears Sebastian playing. She is moved by his talent, and goes to watch him play. Sebastian, however, is quickly fired.

Months later, Mia goes to another party. She sees Sebastian again. He is now playing as the keyboardist for a 1980s pop music cover band. Mia requests that the band play "I Ran (So Far Away)" by A Flock of Seagulls. Afterward the two walk together and look for their cars.

Five years later, Mia is a famous actress. She is married to another man, with whom she has a daughter. 

The world premiere for "La La Land" was at the Venice Film Festival. It was an opening night movie on August 31, 2016. The movie also showed at the Telluride Film Festival, Toronto International Film Festival, and many others.

"La La Land" has taken in more than $85 million against a budget of $30 million. The movie was released in the United States in December 2016. In January 2017, the movie showed in more theaters for a total of 1,515 theaters.

"La La Land" was named by Peter Travers as his favorite movie of 2016. Other critics gave the movie high marks. Rotten Tomatoes rated the movie 93%.

"La La Land" won a number of awards. At the Golden Globe Awards, it won seven awards. These included Best Picture-Musical or Comedy, Best Actor-Musical or Comedy and Best Actress-Musical or Comedy.


