Molly Pitcher

Molly Pitcher is the name given to a legendary Revolutionary War heroine. There is no record of a real person named "Molly Pitcher" in Revolutionary war records. Most historians agree it was a nickname for a person doing a particular job. It is thought the name came from a soldier's cry for a pitcher of water to drink or to cool their overheated cannons. Molly was a common woman's nickname at the time.

Stories about the American Revolution were first told by word of mouth. This allowed the storyteller to exaggerate or even invent history. The stories keep being told today even though recent scholarship has proved they are not authentic. Molly Pitcher is a composite of more than one person. A great many women helped soldiers on the battlefields during the Revolutionary war. Most were wives and children of soldiers. According to the legend, "Molly Pitcher" took over the firing of a cannon after her husband was wounded. The Battle of Monmouth is the most likely source for the rise of the legend. Her story was started many years after the war by writers and artists. A Currier and Ives print of a "Captain Molly" appeared in 1848. The first written mention of Molly Pitcher didn't appear until 1859. It wasn't until 1876 that someone published a genealogy claiming a local woman was the real Molly Pitcher. After that the cult of Molly Pitcher grew and grew.

There is often a kernel of truth in every legend. Molly Pitcher is no exception. Molly Pitcher is as popular as ever and has found her way into grade-school and high-school textbooks. Many other sources just repeat one version or another of the legend. Internet sources even argue whether Molly Pitcher was a feminist. There are several women whose story may make up a part of the Mary Pitcher legend:

Molly Pitcher was not just one person. She was inspired by the actions of several Revolutionary War women who made real contributed to the effort. They served in many capacities with patriotism and courage. The Revolutionary war was more a war of small skirmishes than full scale battles. It was not at all unusual for women to be drawn into a battles. Women filled many roles traditionally thought of as being filled only by men.

Joseph Plumb Martin was a soldier in the Continental Army. He kept a narrative of his experiences. This came to the attention of historians in the 1950s. Martin describes an incident at the Battle of Monmouth involving an unnamed woman:



