Joanne (album)

Joanne is the fifth studio album by American singer-songwriter Lady Gaga. It was released on October 21, 2016. It was named for Gaga's aunt, her father's sister, who died before Gaga was born. Joanne is also Gaga's middle name.

The album was produced by Gaga, Mark Ronson, Kevin Parker, and BloodPop, among other producers. Gaga collaborated with RedOne on the song "Angel Down", which was written about Trayvon Martin, who was killed in 2012. RedOne also helped produce Gaga's previous blockbuster hits, such as "Just Dance", "Poker Face", and "Bad Romance". Country songwriter Hillary Lindsey also worked with Gaga on "Joanne" on songs like "Million Reasons". Singer-songwriter Beck worked with Gaga on the dance song "Dancin' in Circles".

Two singles were released for the album: "Perfect Illusion" and "Million Reasons". The first single reached the top 20 in several countries, like the US, Canada, Australia, and the UK. "Million Reasons" first peaked at number 52 on the "Billboard" Hot 100. However, after her Super Bowl halftime performance on February 5, 2017, the song entered the "Billboard" Hot 100 again at number four. This is Gaga's 14th top-ten song and her 10th song to reach the top five on the chart.

Gaga went on a Dive Bar Tour at three different dive bars in the United States to promote "Joanne".

Critics have said that "Joanne" is different from Gaga's previous releases, such as "The Fame", "The Fame Monster", "Born This Way", and "Artpop". The album sold 201,000 copies in its first week in the United States. The album entered the "Billboard" 200 albums chart at number one. It became Gaga's fourth number-one album in the U.S. After the album was released, Gaga became the female artist with the most number-one albums of the 2010s decade. "Joanne" ranked at number 108 on the "Billboard" 200 year-end chart of 2016 in the US.

In August 2017, Gaga began the Joanne World Tour, which is set to run through December.

The standard version of the album has 11 songs, while the deluxe version has 14.


