Therese Johaug's doping case

Therese Johaug's doping case is the the doping case of professional cross-country skier Therese Johaug - winner of FIS Nordic World Ski Championships 2013 – Women's 10 kilometre freestyle.

On 13 February 2017, NIF (a sports association) punished Johaug: For 13 months she would not be allowed to do competitions in her sport. (The full name of NIF is: Norwegian Olympic and Paralympic Committee and Confederation of Sports.)

FIS, or International Ski Federation, made the doping case go to CAS, or Court of Arbitration for Sport; FIS did this, because the organization thinks that the punishment is not long enough. Her case was heard on 6 June 2017.

The decision (from CAS) about punishment, will not come before 18 August 2017.

In 2016 Johaug said she has used asthma medication, against respiratory infections; she did not have asthma; she got the medication from the national team's medical doctor. Such use of asthma medicine, though not illegal up to certain limits, has been termed "doping" by sports officials of other countries; asthma expert Lars Larsson finds such practices, unethical.

On 21 October 2016 Norwegian Ski Federation (NSF) held its autumn meeting; NSF said that the mandate of its fact-finding commission, was made to increase, to include the "Johaug period"; the commission was originally mandated to find out about the giving of medication to Norwegian skiers, from 1 January 2012 until 30 August 2016. The fact-finders include Kjell Larsson, Lars Pedersen and Katja Mjøsund.

On 10 May 2016 Johaug was tested, and the results were okay. The test was followed by 129 days without test; Doping lawyer Olli Rauste said that because so many days were without any test, then a question will come: Was a period without testing, made for Johaug, for a reason? A different source said that the 129 days without tests, was a long time, but anti-doping expert Åke Andrén-Sandberg said that 129 days without testing is not anything special.

On 16 September 2016, a urine sample was gathered from Johaug, out of competition; two tests were performed on the sample, and both tests showed clostebol levels outside the WADA-approved range, often referred to as "testing positive".

The level of clostebol found in Johaug, was 13 nanogram clostebol per milliliter - 260 times the concentration found in the doping case of Spanish cyclist Alberto Contador.

Johaug was told on 4 October, about testing positive for clostebol.

On 13 October 2016 the NSF, or Norwegian Ski Federation, met journalists, with Johaug and the national team's medical doctor; at the meeting NSF said that Johaug had tested postitive for clostebol, and Johaug's story is that she had used Trofodermin, a [skin cream, or] topical cream; the packaging has a warning sign that shows it contains a substance that belongs to the group of drugs that are used for doping in sports; because of the laws of Italy, the packaging for Trofodermin must have a warning sign. 

About the pharmaceutical drug, the story told by the national team's medical doctor, was that the drug had been bought at a local pharmacy - that only sells medicine that does not require prescriptions - by the team's doctor, Fredrik S. Bendiksen, to cure Johaug's lip that got sore (possibly due to herpes labialis) after sunburn during a high altitude training stay in Livigno, Italy. The story is that, on 3 September Johaug started using one pharmaceutical drug provided (that day) by the team physician. On 4 September, the team physician handed over to Johaug another pharmaceutical drug - Trofodermin, and he told her it did not contain any forbidden substances; that is the story of the former team physician and Johaug. The story is that, the drug was used during 4—15 September. Johaug left the meeting, before questions were taken from the journalists. The team physician quit his job, in front of everyone at the meeting, and the reason for quitting was that he said the responsibility was his. However, every athlete is personally responsible for one's own use of a controlled substance, according to the WADA code. That physician did not speak any more to journalist about the case [until the 6 June 2017 hearing at CAS].

The 129 days of no testing, makes it difficult to say that, it is not possible that the banned substance (found during testing,) came from an older injection of anabolic steroids, rather than cream being put on Johaug's lip.

On 15 October TV2 got from the pharmacy, a copy of the receipt for the only sale of the medication (Trofodermin) that was sold there in the period 28 August to 4 September; in likelihood it was a cash transaction.

On 17 October, Johaug's lawyer said to TV2 that Johaug did get all the packaging of the medication (together with the medication) from the team physician.

Media has asked Anti-Doping Norway (thru Halvor Byfuglien) what amount of controlled substance has been found; none of the parties wish to tell, said media on 24 October. Johaug would have to give her permission for that specific information to be given to journalists.

About what was said at the meeting with journalists (on 13 October), "Aftenposten" (a newspaper) asked: The national team's physician [said that he] "first got one phone call about Johaug's problem regarding a cold sore. Another [call] a day later. Likely even another one, another day later. Still ... [the physician], known as "the pedant", did not bring ... safe and known [medication] from Norway. Why? ... [The physician] knew very well that Johaug often suffered from cold sores. He was an experienced and respected sports physician with extensive knowledge of his athletes. The support team for the world's best ski team does everything [possible] so that athletes shall concentrate on two things - to train as best possible - and to rest as much as possible. All the assistants are drilled to help in improving conditions and situations. The physician knew that Johaug's cold sores had a tendency to rebound. Still he neither sent her a legal salve for the trip [to Italy], or brought such a salve ... there. Why not? ... Already 28 August the physician was informed about how Johaug was suffering with her lips. On the morning of 2 September he saw the sufferings with his own eyes. Still another 24 hours passed before he bought medication for her. Why did so much time pass? ... [In Italy the physician] can not obtain Terra-Cotril, which he is familiar with, but instead he obtains Keratoplastika and Trofodermin, which are unfamiliar to him. Already here there is reason to think that he should become curious and take a closer look at what these salves contain. Why doesn't he? ... Checking out a new, unknown drug should be as rehearsed by a sports physician, as for a high school student to start off a sentence with capital letters. Why didn't he check? And: Why did he not see the doping warning? ... [The question that Johaug said she asked, is it not] the reminder needed, for a physician who has forgotten/ does not know/ is unconcentrated: "This I must check"? ... Did Johaug check the Trofodermin package as accurately as she described two weeks ... [before 13 October, about how she says she always checks medication]? ... [In regard to what Johaug's lawyer told media on 17 October:] Why was this not revealed at the meeting with journalists (on 13 October)? Why did Johaug throw the packaging? If there was a doping warning-sign on the packaging, how could she avoid seeing it?"

"Aftenposten knows that also persons who are close to the physician, have said that something was odd about his explanation [at the press conference]", Aftenposten said.

On 19 October media said that Vidar Løfshus, chief of the national team, said that Johaug "used the drug for 11 or 12 days; the story of the former team physician said that the physician recommended using the drug for five to ten days; As to why Johaug did not bring [to Italy] the [ prescription-] pharmaceuticul drug that she clearly needs for great parts of the year, the chief said "Sometimes we forget the toothpaste - and" lip balm.

Trofodermin is a registered pharmaceutical drug in Italy and Brazil, but not in Norway. It is produced by Pfizer, outside Norway. The drug is not part of regular inventory in Norwegian pharmacies. National team physician Bendiksen had worked for Pfizer in Norway for 8 years.

On 18 October 2016, Johaug was suspended for two months, after Anti-Doping Norway (ADNO) concluded their [first] investigation of the case - a preliminary investigation. On 19 October 2016, ADNO issued a press release that Johaug is "suspended until 18 December 2016, or until time of sentence if sooner", because the organization thought that she could not be said to have acted without fault. The suspension forbids participation in competition and organized training. ADNO also decided that a case can be opened against the team doctor Fredrik Bendiksen for possible violation of the doping code.

About the possibility of Johaug [being told] to return her part of "a lot of equipment belonging to" NSF and held by different members the national team, the team's chief (Erik Røste) said on 19 October, that it is not up to him "or the board of directors to bring back equipment. It's a matter I have not thought about".

Media said that she will be allowed to re-join training sessions of the national team from 4 December 2016, for the last quarter of her suspension; but before the suspension finished, it was made to last for a longer time.

On 13 October 2016 Åke Andrén-Sandberg said about Johaug's explanation that "It is an unlikely explanation, but not impossible".

On 13 October 2016 Justyna Kowalczyk put a picture on website Twitter, of packaging of the controlled substance, including warning sign. On 14 October Sarah Lewis said to media that Johaug already should have been suspended for her link to the controlled substance. Magnus Ericsson, chief of the Swedish doping laboratory finds it likely that Johaug will be suspended for two years. Kamil Wolnicki, a Polish sports commentator, wrote in Przeglad Sportowy that the credibility of Norwegian skiing has taken a beating, and that "No matter how many tears she cried during the meeting with journalists, she must be punished by the rules. No matter how sad this is for Norwegians".

On 13 October Aleris announced their cancelling of sponsorship of NSF; Aleris story was that, Johaug's same day announcement had "nothing to do" with Aleris' decision; the company explained their decision also by referring to "the doping rules for sports" and a doping conviction from the previous July.

In a 17 October Dagens Nyheter article, Jens Littorin said that "Johaug's defence tactic is cracking".

On 17 October media quoted Harri Syväsalmi former director of WADA, criticizing that Johaug, at that point, had not already been suspended, adding "Imagine if world championships or the Olympics were tomorrow. What would they then have done"?

On 19 October 2016 retailer Lidl Suomi advertised and offered "free lip balm for customers who purchase Norwegian smoked salmon", as a way of making fun of Johaug's positive doping result.

On 19 October media said that sporting goods retailer XXL decided to remove from its inventory related to Finland, all items of the brand "Johaug"; the company's vice director in Finland said that the company does not want to be associated with the skier after the scandal.

On 20 October media quoted Gerhard Urain at Fischer (company), one of Johaug's sponsors, saying that if an athlete has a [sponsor] contract with Fischer, and is convicted [in regard to doping], then the contract will be stopped immediately; Johaug stands to lose millions of Norwegian kroner per year from Fischer, if she is convicted.

On 20 October Italian doctor Peter Ploner cast doubt on the credibility of Johaug's explanation. Ploner said he had never heard of anyone using Trofodermin on sun-burnt lips and the medication cannot be used on lips, and further he said that "One should not apply clostebol on the thin skin of lips".

Hasse Svens (journalist and maker of documentaries - for SVT - on doping) said on tv-program Opinion live on 20 October that he does not believe in Johaug's tears at the meeting with journalists, and he also said that "She has come up with so many explanations. First she said that she knew nothing and had not seen anything, then suddenly she had seen the packaging [of the medication]. I don't think it's enough. And [it also isn't enough] that a physician with more than 30 years experience is able to not see the warning" on the packaging of the medication.

On 21 October media cited Gian Franco Kasper, chief of FIS, saying that he has not seen the evidence, and the matter "will have to be decided by medical experts, but I have my doubts". He received the news about the result of Johaug's doping test while holding a speech about doping in a room full of journalists; a member of the audience informed him; Kasper was "not very happy about how" he was informed. 

On 21 October media cited Aino-Kaisa Saarinen: "It is a strange story. I am wondering if Johaug is telling the truth".

On 21 October, Thomas Pettersson (sportswriter for Expressen) said that "For every passing day, for every new speculation, for each new unexplained strange thing - a piece of Johaug's credibility disappears. (...) Come out of your hiding place, Johaug. (...) I have no idea what kind of a genius has arranged the media strategy around "Johaug-gate", but I can say that I am not exactly impressed".

On 21 October, media said that Joakim Abrahamsson, a former co-chief of Swedish national team, said that if "someone came from Russia, a country that had great problems with doping, the opinions would be different". He added that "Then automatically there would be a ban from two to four years. But now we [are] only [going to say] that this 'is a mistake, of course she should be competing'". Media added that without changes, "he is afraid that soon many will happen to have salve [or pharmaceutical cream] on their lips".

On 21 October media said that cyclist Stefano Agostini claimed to have used the same pharmaceutical cream as Johaug; the clostebol amount found in his urine got him a 15-month ban that ended in 2014.

On 22 October media cited Reijo Jylhä , a former chief of Finland's national team: "I know very well how things are being felt [now] in Norway. To me it looks like they are making the same mistake that we made after the Lahti Scandal. They are not forthcoming with the entire truth". When asked about what advice he has for Norway and the ski federation, he said: "I think it's too late. When the first case comes - the case regarding Sundby - and disclosures replace disclosures, then the damage is done. One cannot compare the cases of Sundby and Johaug. But when things go wrong, things often turn out the way they are doing in Norway".

On 23 October media said that Markus Cramer (Russia's coach - a German that formerly headed Swiss- and German national teams) "describes the case about the Johaug-drug (the salve, Trofodermin) and the verdict that convicted Martin Johnsrud Sundby of doping ... [with a legal drug], as bombs. In Cramer's view, the credibility of the sport of skiing is being seriously challenged in relation to the general public".

On 24 October media quoted Toini Gustafsson Rönnlund, former Swedish champion: "I have a feeling [about the much talked about medication for Johaug's lip,] that she bought it herself", but that is only her own opinion.

On 13 February 2017, NIF (a sports association) punished Johaug: For 13 months she would not be allowed to do competitions in her sport. (The full name of NIF is: Norwegian Olympic and Paralympic Committee and Confederation of Sports.)

FIS, or International Ski Federation, made the doping case go to CAS, or Court of Arbitration for Sport; FIS did this, because the organization thinks that the punishment is not long enough. Her case was heard on 6 June 2017.

The verdict from CAS should come on 18 August 2017, or later.


