Light Rail Transit (Singapore)

The Light Rail Transit (LRT) is a light rail system used in Singapore. It acts as a feeder service to the Mass Rapid Transit network. It started operation in 6 November 1999 with the Bukit Panjang LRT route. As of 2016, the system consists of three lines with 43 stations.

To reduce traffic jams in highly populated areas during peak hours, the Land Transport Authority (LTA) decided to build a light rail system. Construction began in 1996 with the Bukit Panjang LRT route running from Choa Chu Kang. It would serve areas in Bukit Panjang. It was opened on 6 November 1999.

The LRT is also used in the Sengkang and Punggol areas. Construction began in January 2000 for both the East Loop and West Loop of Sengkang LRT and Punggol LRT. Sengkang East Loop was opened on 18 January 2003. Sengkang West Loop and Punggol East Loop were opened on 29 January 2005.

Further LRT line projects were cancelled in 2008 as there was not enough space to build them over the ground.


Singapore's LRT network has 3 lines, consisting of 43 stations in total.

The Bukit Panjang LRT opened on 6 November 1999. Operated by SMRT Trains, the line is in the shape of a single loop, and interchanges the North South Line at Choa Chu Kang Station and the Downtown Line at Bukit Panjang.

The Sengkang LRT Line opened on 18 January 2003 while the Punggol LRT Line opened on 29 January 2005. The lines are operated by SBS Transit. Each line consists of an East and West loops, with each loop of a line meeting at either Sengkang or Punggol, and both lines being joined with tracks running parallel to the North East Line below.

The LRT lines are served by Automated People Mover rolling stocks, which was initially in a one-car formation. Due to higher passenger usage, Most of the cars were joined together to form two-car operations. The Bukit Panjang LRT Line started having 2-car formations when there was enough C801A trains ready for service, which the Sengkang and Punggol LRT lines started having 2-car formations around 2015. On two-car operations, passengers cannot walk between carriages, and people can only go to the other carriage by alighting at a station and boarding the other carriage before the train leaves.

A total of four rolling stock have been introduced on the LRT, namely the:


On 24 November 2015, an announcement was made that platform barriers, which reduce the risk of passengers from falling onto the tracks, were to be installed at all existing LRT stations, except Ten Mile Junction LRT Station, since Platform screen doors had already been installed since it began operations, in order to save electricity costs as it was the only LRT station with air conditioning. They are currently being installed between 2016 and 2018. And installation has been completed at Choa Chu Kang and Bukit Panjang stations, likely because of their higher passenger usage than the other stations, as interchange stations. "Please keep clear" announcements will be made when the train doors are about to close. The platform barriers will not be installed with moving platform doors, possibly to reduce costs.

Trains usually arrive every 2.2 minutes on the Bukit Panjang LRT Line along Choa Chu Kang LRT Station to Bukit Panjang LRT Station while it is around 4.4 minutes along Petir LRT Station to Senja LRT Station. The arrival time of the next two trains will be displayed at all stations. For Sengkang LRT Line and Punggol LRT Line, no specific train timings were stated, but the timing before the train arrives can be seen at Fernvale LRT Station only.

At Ten Mile Junction LRT Station, trains arrive only every 20 minutes, possibly due to low passenger usage.



