Boulos Yazigi

Boulos Yazigi or Paul Rami Yagizi (Arabic: بولس يازجي ) is a bishop or metropolitan of the Greek Orthodox Church. He has been missing since 2013, when he was kidnapped with archbishop Yohanna Ibrahim of the Syriac Orthodox Church.

Yazigi was born in 1959 in Lattakya, Syria. He studied for a civil engineering degree at the University of Tishreen in Latakia, Syria. He studied theology at the University of Thessaloniki in Greece and received a masters degree in 1989 and a PhD in 1992. The title of his thesis was "Eschatology & Ethics: The Eschatological Foundations of the Life in Christ According to St. John Chrysostom." He also studied Byzantine music and iconography in Greece and Mount Athos.

Yazigi's brother is Greek Orthodox Patriarch John X Yazigi.

In 1992, Yazigi became a religion instructor at Saint John of Damascus Institute of Theology at the University of Balamand in Lebanon. He was dean of the institute from 1994 to 2001. At the same time, he was appointed abbot of Balamand Monastery in the Koura District in northern Lebanon.

Yazigi was ordained a priest in 1992 and became bishop of Aleppo in 2000. He wrote 11 books and 7 articles on religious subjects, including translations of English and Greek works into Arabic.

Yazigi disappeared on April 22, 2013 in Syria after he was kidnapped along with archbishop Yohanna Ibrahim of the Syriac Orthodox Church. The two men worked in Aleppo. Their driver was shot and killed in the attack. The two men were kidnapped in the village of Kfar Dael by "a terrorist group" on the road to Aleppo from the rebel-held border with Turkey at Bab al Hawa. Ibrahim went to get Yazigi because he was familiar with the border crossing and the route. The name of the driver killed was Fathallah Kabud. Bishop Ibrahim went to the border to receive two priests who had been kidnapped: Armenian Catholic Michel Kayal and Greek Orthodox Isaac Moawad. Money was paid for the priests on April 19, but Ibrihim did not receive the priests that day, and they asked him to return. Ibrahim was experienced with negotiating kidnapping releases. In the year before his kidnapping, he participated in 20 successful hostage exchanges.<ref></refIt is now known that Boulos Yazigi was murdered in a horrific decapitation by a jihadist from a Caucasian Republic. The video has surfaced and been viewed in a Turkish court during proceedings against the perpetrator for other matters. In fact, it appears that Turkish Secret Services and the Justice Minister of Erdogan's government aided and abetted the downplaying of his crimes ,if not materially supported him via controlled others for plausible deniability.Russia's new rapproachment with Turkey makes it highly unlikely he will have to answer for his crimes. The jihadist was /is a member of Islamic fundamentalists that are still called "moderates" by the USA and its allies ,even though the group is well known for most of its activity being the declaration of war on /and perpetrating violent murders on Christians in Syria ...a religion in common with most of NATO and its allies. He has been in prison for at least two years in Turkey for the above -mentioned other matter. He kept the knife used in the decapitation as a souvenir and in fact the blood on the knife was used as additional proof that the victim was Boulos Yazigi.


