Papers, Please

Papers, Please is a video game made by Lucas Pope, an indie game developer, published under his secret name 3909. It is about an immigration officer who decided who to let in and who to refuse entry to the fictional country of Arstotzka. The game was released on August 8, 2013 for Microsoft Windows and for OS X. It was released for Linux on February 12, 2014. It was released for iPad on December 12, 2014. A PlayStation Vita version was announced in August 2014, but has not come out yet.

The gameplay for "Papers, Please" revolves around an immigrations inspector's life and job. The player can allow people to enter Arstotzka or refuse them. The player can use different tools to check if the immigration papers are out of date, real or fake. The player must try to keep unwanted people out of Arstotzka, like terrorists, criminals and those with incorrect papers. The player must correctly allow and not allow people in to the country within a set amount of time. Each mistake a player makes is 5 credits off their earned money at the end of the day. The money earned at the end of the day is based on how many people have been correctly finished. The player must pay for the officer's family, food and heating. The player can choose to not pay for any of them, which results in something happening to the family.

The game has 20 possible endings.

Lucas Pope created this game, He used to work for Naughty Dog. After working on the "Uncharted" games, he left to become an indie developer. He started work on it in November 2012, but it took longer then Pope thought, and was finished in nine months. It was put on green light on April 11, 2013 and was greenlit on May 1.

"Papers, Please" has been thanked for its sense of immersion. CBC News' Jonathan Ore called "Papers, Please" a "nerve-racking sleuthing game with relentless pacing and dozens of compelling characters – all from a desk job".

Some critics however reacted badly to the paperwork gameplay. Stephanie Bendixsen from the ABC game review show "Good Game" found the game "tedious", commenting "while I found the issues that arose from the decisions you are forced to make quite interesting, I was just so bored that I just struggled to go from one day to the next. I was torn between wanting to find out more, and just wanting it all to stop."


