Synchronized diving

Synchronized diving (synchro diving) is a sport in which two divers dive at the same time as a team from a three-meter springboard or a ten-meter platform. It is one type of diving which has belonged to the Olympic games since 2000 Sydney Olympics. The competition consists of five or six rounds depending on the events. Divers dive two basic dives during the first two rounds. Then they dive more complex freestyle dives from the third to the fifth round. The winners are determined according to total scores from judges. There are two types of judges. One is a technical judge who evaluates degree of completion of their dives.  Another is a synchro judge who evaluates the synchronization of two divers.

Synchronized diving was internationally introduced at the 1995 FINA world cup. In 1999, four synchronized diving events were added as the Olympic programme at the IOC Executive Board meeting held in Lausanne. Then, it became an Olympic sport with its debut at the 2000 Sydney games with three-meter springboard and ten-meter platform events for both men and women.

There are six groups of dives. The first four show the direction the diver rotates.

1. Forward group: The diver faces the front of the board and jumps toward the water.

2. Backward group: Backward dives begin on the end of the board with divers back to the water.

3. Reverse group: Reverse dives begin with the diver facing the front of the board and then  rotates toward the board.

4. Inward group: these dives begin on the end of the board with divers’ back to the water but then rotates toward the board.

5. Twisting group: Any dive that uses a twist excluding armstands.

6. Armstand group: The dives begin with a handstand position on the end of the platform before the dive.

A dive may be performed using one of the following four positions.

Pike: The legs are straight with the body bent at the waist. arm placement can be different according to the dives by each diver.

Tuck: The Body is bent at the waist and knees with thighs drawn to the chest.  Heels kept close to the buttocks, and feet should be kept together.

Straight: without bend at the waist or knees. Arm placement can be varied by diver’s choice or is decided by the dive performed.

Free: using any of the above three positions, or combinations them, when performing a twisting dive.

While it takes seven judges to score individual events, 11 judges score synchronized diving. During a synchro event, three judges score the completion of Diver A’s performance, while three other judges score the completion of Diver B’s performance. The remaining five judges score the synchronization of two divers. Each judge scores a dive between 0 and 10 points, in half-point increments.

10: Excellent

8.5-9.5: Very good

7-8: Good

5-6.5: Satisfactory

2.5-4.5: Deficient

0.5-2: Unsatisfactory

0: Completely failed

Judges evaluate the following parts of a dive to determine an overall score:

Approach: several steps forward to the end of the board before takeoff. It should be smooth but forceful with good form.

Takeoff: A diver’s jump from the board prior to execution of the dive. showing control and balance is important with appropriate angle and distance from the board.

Elevation: The amount of the jump has an effect on the appearance of the dive.A higher jump allows divers to dive with accuracy and smoothness of movement.

Execution: proper mechanical performance, skills, form, and grace.

Entry: The entry into the water is important because it’s the last moment the judge watches. It should be vertical with a minimal amount of splash.


