Undertale

Undertale (also written as UNDERTALE) is a role-playing video game made by Toby Fox, an independent artist.

In the game, players control a human child who has fallen into the Underground, a large and out-of-the-way place under the top of the Earth, separated from the rest of the world by a magic wall. The player meets many kinds of monsters as they try to return to the surface, mainly through the fighting system; the player takes turns selecting actions and avoiding attacks made of many bullets, and can choose to make peace with monsters instead of attacking and killing them. The player's choices change many things in the game, including how characters act, and what kind of story it is.

Fox developed almost the whole game by himself; he wrote the words and made the music by himself, and only used a few pieces of extra art given to him by other artists. The game was inspired by the "Mother" and "Mario & Luigi" role-playing series, the "bullet hell" shooter series "Touhou Project", and the British comedy show "Mr. Bean". "Undertale" was originally meant to be two hours long and released in mid-2014, but creating the game took over three years, making the campaign longer and not making the game available until much later.

The game was released on Steam for Microsoft Windows and OS X on September 15, 2015. When it was released, the game was praised for its writing, themes, easy-to-learn fighting system, music, and original ideas; with praise directed towards its story, dialogue, and characters. The game sold over a million copies, and was nominated for many honors and awards, including Game of the Year from many gaming news sources, winning others from conventions including South by Southwest.

"Undertale" is a role-playing game that shows everything from above. In the game, players control a child and finish tasks in order to go forward in the story. Players explore an underground world of towns and caves, and must solve many puzzles on the way. The underground world is the home of monsters, many of whom fight the player; players decide to kill, run away, or make friends with them.

When players meet enemies in either scripted events or random encounters, they enter a battle mode. During battles, players control a small red heart which represents their soul, and must avoid attacks shot by the monster(s) in a way much like a bullet hell shooter. Deeper into the game, new types of gameplay are shown; these include colored bullets which harm players only while they are moving, or only while they are staying still, and boss battles which change the way players control the heart. Players may choose to attack the enemy, which involves timed button presses, earning EXP and gold for defeating them. Or instead, they can use the ACT option to do non-violent actions, which are different from enemy to enemy. If players uses the right actions to respond to the enemy, they can choose to spare them and end the fight without killing them. In order for some boss battles to be completed peacefully, the player must survive until the character they are facing has finished their dialogue. The game has many story branches and endings depending on whether players choose to kill or spare their enemies; and as such, it is possible to clear the game without killing a single enemy.

Monsters will talk with players during the battles, and the game will tell the players what the monster's feelings and actions are. Enemy attacks change based on how players interact with them: if the player chooses non-violent options, enemy attacks are easy, but they become harder if players choose violent options. The game uses many metafictional elements in both its gameplay and story. When players play in a boss battle more than once, the dialogue will change depending on actions from the times they played the battle before.

Sans- A short skeleton who enjoys telling a skele-TON of puns. He wears a blue jacket and gym shorts. He has knowledge of the concept of timelines, and might have a scientific background, and likes to eat/drink ketchup.

Papyrus- Sans' brother, who wants to be a part of the royal guard. He is friends with Undyne. He loves cooking spaghetti, but is very bad at it.

Alphys- A scientist, who tried to find a scientific way out of the underground. Alphys is in love with Undyne. Her best friend is Mettaton. She stutters and has low self-confidence. She also loves anime.

Undyne- Head of the royal guard. Her job to protect the monsters of the underground. Her best friend is Papyrus and she has a crush on Alphys. She loves anime.

Mettaton- A robot built by Alphys, originally made to kill humans, but later turned into a TV star. Mettaton was previously a ghost, just like his cousin, Napstablook.

Napstablook- Mettaton's ghost cousin. They and Mettaton have very different personalities, as Mettaton seems more outgoing and sassy while Napstablook seems more quiet and depressed.

Asgore- Toriel's ex-husband. He is the king of the underground, and has declared that all humans who fall down must die, so that he can collect their souls. Once he has seven, he can destroy the Barrier which keeps monsters in the Underground.

Toriel- In the beginning of the game, she acts like a motherly figure. She was once the queen of monsters, and the wife of Asgore, but she left when he declared that all humans must be killed. She was truly the brains behind the throne.


