Military terminology

Military terminology is the words and acronyms used by military organization and members of various militaries. Military terms may have the same spelling as common words but mean something very different. Common terms may also differ between militaries of English-speaking countries. They also differ in their use of abbreviations. For example, British and American abbreviations for the same thing may be very different. Military terms can be also be specific to one branch of a nation's military or to a specific war or period of time.

Some terms are intentionally intended to obscure, disguise, distort, or otherwise change the meaning of words. This is called "doublespeak". For example, the United States reduction of troop strength in Afghanistan is called by American troops "the retrograde." This is from an old military euphemism meaning to retreat (no military likes to admit it retreats). Some phrases are so strange that nobody outside the military understands them. "15 minutes prior to 15 minutes prior" refers to military people being told to show up 15 minutes early for everything. So when a commanding officer says there will be a meeting at "06:00" (6:00 a.m. on the 24-hour clock), it means to show up at 05:45. When junior officers repeat the order to the sergeant, to him it means 05:30, and so on. By the time it filters down to the lowest ranking soldier, it can mean be there by midnight.

To listen to military people talking, everything seems to be in acronyms. For instance, "I was on the FOB when the IDF hit, so I radioed the TOC" (I was on the Forward Operating Base when the Ineffective Direct Fire hit, so I radioed the Tactical Operations center). Military people seem to love using acronyms which is probably why there are so many of them. New recruits, military families and even seasoned veterans are expected to know most if not all the current acronyms.

To say letters out loud, over the phone or when it might be unclear what letter is being pronounced a phonic alphabet is used. On ships, a navy would use flags for different letters of the alphabet. The NATO phonetic alphabet (with flags) is:

This is used often in military acronyms. For example, Bravo Zulu means "well done", a compliment. It was taken from naval signal manuals meaning the same thing. However, if someone were to say "B Z" nobody would understand. if someone used the term Whisky Tango Foxtrot it means "what the fuck?" Posed as a question or used as an interjection, it is at least a little more polite than saying the words.




