Inequality

Inequality is when one object is:

Inequality is sometimes used to name a statement that one expression is smaller, greater, not smaller or not greater than the other.

Inequality in math is when two solutions or answers are compared by greater than or less than. It is when the two or yet many solutions are being compared is not of equal amount. Solving an inequality means finding its solutions. When you substitute a number to a variable and the statement is true, then it is a solution. When you substitute a number to a variable and the statement is not true then, the number is not a solution to the statement.

Inequality is finding a solution to a given variable. It is finding a relative order of a set. Inequality have many solutions but you need to find the real solutions. Inequality is solving real numbers. The proper way to read inequality is from left to right, just like the other equations, but the only difference is they have different rules for every equation.

For example, x+4>12, where x is a real number. First, a person needs to find the x and he/she need to know if it is a solution. The answer will be x>8 and it is a true statement. This expression is about the location of x within the set of real numbers. A number line is one way to show the location relative to all other real numbers.(See figure Inequality 1)

There are five different kinds of inequalities:

There are four ways to solve quadratic equations:
Furthermore, it will take two steps to solve an inequality. The first one is to simplify using the reciprocal of addition or subtraction. The second one is to simplify more by using the reciprocal of multiplication or division. When you are multiplying or dividing an inequality by a negative number, remember to turn the inequality symbol.

Inequality is a mathematical statement that explains that the two values are not equal and different. The equation ab means a is not equal to b. Inequality is the same with any equation but the only difference is that inequality does not use an equal sign instead it uses symbols. The inequality b>a represents that b is greater than a. Speed limits,mark, and others use inequality to express them.

When solving an inequality a person need to have a true statement. When you divide or multiply an inequality with a negative number on both sides the statement is false.In order to make the statement correct with a negative number, you need to reverse the symbol to make that statement correct. When a number is a positive number you don’t need to reverse the symbol. Inequality is about making a true statement.

For example, start with a true statement -6y<-12. When both sides are divided by -6 the result will become y<2. In this statement the symbol need to be reversed in order to have a true statement, y>2 is the correct answer. In the number line (see figure Inequality 2), a closed shaded circle points out that it is included in the solution set. An open circle points out that it is not included in the solution set.



