Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney

Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney is a visual novel/adventure game developed and published by Capcom. The game was originally a Japan-only Game Boy Advance title called Gyakuten Saiban. However, the Nintendo DS remake Gyakuten Saiban Yomigaeru Gyakuten was translated and released in 2005 outside of Japan. The DS remake features a bonus case called Rise From The Ashes which was not in the original GBA version.

Phoenix Wright is the main protagonist of the game. He is a defense attorney who must prove that his falsely-accused clients are not guilty.

Mia Fey is Phoenix's boss and mentor. She is killed in the second case. However, her spirit can be channelled by Maya and sometimes she reappears to give Phoenix help or advice.

Maya is Mia's little sister. She is Phoenix's assistant. She is also a spirit medium and can sometimes channel Mia's spirit.

Miles Edgeworth is a prosecutor, and Phoenix Wright's rival. He is the prosecutor in every case in the game except for The First Turnabout and Turnabout Goodbyes.

Larry Butz is Phoenix's client in the first case of the game, where he is accused of murder. He is also a witness in the fourth case.

Winston Payne is the prosecutor of the first case. He has appeared in every Ace Attorney game except Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney - Dual Destinies. He is normally the prosecutor of the Tutorial cases of each game.

Dick Gumshoe is a detective who is usually in charge of investigating the cases that Phoenix takes on.

Manfred von Karma is the prosecutor in case 4 of the game, and is Edgeworth's mentor.

The game features 5 cases.

Phoenix defends Larry Butz, who is accused of murdering his girlfriend.

Phoenix's mentor, Mia Fey, is killed. Phoenix defends her sister, Maya Fey, who is accused of murdering her.

Will Powers, an actor who potrays the Steel Samurai, is accused of murdering Jack Hammer. Phoenix defends him in court.

A man is killed on a boat at Gourd Lake, and Miles Edgeworth is accused of the murder. Phoenix defends him.

Lana Skye is accused of the murder of Bruce Goodman. Her sister, Ema Skye, convinces Phoenix Wright to take her case.

The game is split into 2 segments, Investigation segments and Trial segments.
During Investigation sections Phoenix visits the crime scene, looks for evidence that might be useful in the trial, and talks to witnesses.
Phoenix has to defend his client, and Cross Examine witness testimonies.


