Woody Allen

Woody Allen (born Allen Stewart Konigsberg on December 1, 1935) is an American screenwriter, director, actor, comedian, author, playwright, and musician whose career spans more than 50 years. He has won the Academy Award three times, and many others in his very long career. His many works and his cerebral movie style, mixing satire and humor, have made him one of the most respected movie directors in the modern era. Allen writes and directs his movies and has also acted in most of them. To inspire himself for his movies, Allen uses literature, philosophy, psychology, Judaism, European cinema, and New York City, where he was born and has lived all life.

Allen was born in The Bronx and raised in Brooklyn, New York City. His parents were Nettie (born Cherrie; November 8, 1906 – January 27, 2002), a bookkeeper at her family's delicatessen, and Martin Konigsberg (December 25, 1900 – January 13, 2001), a jewelry engraver and waiter. His family was Ashkenazi Jewish; his grandparents immigrated from Russia and Austria, and spoke Yiddish, Hebrew, and German. Both parents were born and raised on the Lower East Side of Manhattan. Allen has a sister, Letty, who was born in 1943, and was raised in Midwood, Brooklyn.

Allen started writing scripts for "The Ed Sullivan Show", "The Tonight Show" and other television shows when he was 19. He started working as a comedian in 1961. His first movie, "What's New Pussycat?", was released in 1965. In 1966 he wrote his first play, the Broadway play "Don't Drink the Water". In 1986 Allen's movie "Hannah and Her Sisters" made $18 million.

Allen is Jewish.

Allen has had three wives. He dated Mia Farrow for 12 years. However, they never married and lived in different houses. Allen and Farrow adopted Dylan and Mosche Farrow together. Mia said in 1994 that Allen molested her 7 year old daughter, Dylan Farrow. In February, 2014 an open letter by Dylan was published by the "New York Times". In the letter, Dylan said that Allen had molested her. Her brother Mosche, who is now known as Moses Farrow, said that Allen did not molest her. Allen said the allegations were "untrue and disgraceful". On February 7 2014, Allen wrote a response to Dylan in the "New York Times".

In 1992 Farrow realized that Allen was cheating on her with her adopted daughter Soon-Yi Previn. She found naked pictures of Soon-yi in Allen's house. Farrow and Allen broke up. In 1997 Allen married Previn. Previn and Allen have two adopted daughters.

Allen is an atheist.



