Vande Mataram

Vande Mataram is the national song of India. It is not to be confused with the national anthem of India. The lyrics were written by Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay, in a mix of Sanskrit and Bengali. The song was written in 1876, but published in 1882. The title means "Long live the Mother[land]". The first version of the Flag of India had "वन्दे मातरम्" (Vande Mataram) written on it.

Jana Gana Mana was chosen over "Vande Mataram" as the National Anthem of independent India in January 24, 1950, although before this date, "Vande Mataram" was treated as such. Vande Mataram was rejected because it offended Muslims by calling India "Mother Durga" (a Hindu goddess), equating the nation with Hinduism, and by its origin as part of "Anandamatha", a book they felt had an anti-Muslim message.

Mother, I salute thee! 
Rich with thy hurrying streams,
bright with orchard gleams, 
Cool with thy winds of delight, 
Green fields waving Mother of might, 
Mother free.

Glory of moonlight dreams, 
Over thy branches and lordly streams, 
Clad in thy blossoming trees, 
Mother, giver of ease 
Laughing low and sweet! 
Mother I kiss thy feet, 
Speaker sweet and low! 
Mother, to thee I bow."

Who hath said thou art weak in thy lands 
When swords flash out in seventy million hands 
And seventy million voices roar 
Thy dreadful name from shore to shore? 
With many strengths who art mighty and stored, 
To thee I call Mother and Lord! 
Thou who saves, arise and save! 
To her I cry who ever her foe drove 
Back from plain and sea 
And shook herself free.

Thou art wisdom, thou art law, 
Thou art heart, our soul, our breath 
Though art love divine, the awe 
In our hearts that conquers death. 
Thine the strength that nerves the arm, 
Thine the beauty, thine the charm. 
Every image made divine 
In our temples is but thine.

Thou art Durga, Lady and Queen, 
With her hands that strike and her 
swords of sheen, 
Thou art Lakshmi lotus-throned, 
And the Muse a hundred-tone, 
Pure and perfect without peer, 
Mother lend thine ear, 
Rich with thy hurrying streams, 
Bright with thy orchard gleems, 
Dark of hue O candid-fair

In thy soul, with jewelled hair 
And thy glorious smile divine, 
Loveliest of all earthly lands, 
Showering wealth from well-stored hands! 
Mother, mother mine! 
Mother sweet, I bow to thee, 
Mother great and free!

वन्दे मातरम्
सुजलां सुफलां मलयजशीतलाम्
सस्य श्यामलां मातरम् |
शुभ्र ज्योत्स्ना पुलकित यामिनीम्
फुल्ल कुसुमित द्रुमदलशोभिनीम्,
सुहासिनीं सुमधुर भाषिणीम्
सुखदां वरदां मातरम् ||

Mother, I salute thee!
Rich with thy hurrying streams,
bright with orchard gleams,
Cool with thy winds of delight,
Green fields waving Mother of might,
Mother thee

বন্দে মাতরম্
সুজলাং সুফলাং মলযজশীতলাম্
শস্য শ্যামলাং মাতরম্ |
শুভ্র জ্যোত্স্ন পুলকিত যামিনীম্
ফুল্ল কুসুমিত দ্রুমদলশোভিনীম্,
সুহাসিনীং সুমধুর ভাষিণীম্
সুখদাং বরদাং মাতরম্ ||



