Whitney Houston

Whitney Elizabeth Houston (August 9, 1963 – February 11, 2012) was an American recording artist. She was best known for her hit singles including "How Will I Know", "I Wanna Dance With Somebody (Who Loves Me)" and her cover of Dolly Partons "I Will Always Love You".

Houston was born in Newark, New Jersey. She was the second child of Army serviceman and entertainment executive John Russell Houston, Jr. and gospel singer Cissy Houston. Dionne and Dee Dee Warwick are her cousins.

Whitney began singing at a young age in gospel music at church, being influenced by her mother. She was described as having an impressive ranging mezzo-soprano voice. In 1983, she was discovered by an Arista Records representative and signed to the label.

Houston released her first album, "Whitney Houston", in 1985. It featured the number-one singles "Saving All My Love for You", "Greatest Love of All", and "How Will I Know". Her second album, "Whitney", was released in 1987 and featured the number-one hits "I Wanna Dance with Somebody" and "So Emotional". In 1990, her album "I'm Your Baby Tonight" was released, and the song of the same name also reached number one on the US "Billboard" Hot 100, as did the single "All the Man That I Need". She sang the National Anthem at the 1991 Super Bowl and earned widespread praise for the performance. She starred in the film "The Bodyguard" in 1992 and performed several songs on its soundtrack, one of which was a cover of country singer-songwriter Dolly Parton's song, "I Will Always Love You". The song became Houston's biggest hit of her career and reached number one in countries around the world. Houston sat throughout much of the music video for "I Will Always Love You" because she was pregnant with her daughter, Bobbi Kristina Brown. "I Will Always Love You" became the bestselling song by a female artist, with the soundtrack for "The Bodyguard" becoming the bestselling film soundtrack ever. She performed with singer-songwriter Mariah Carey on the song "When You Believe" for the film "The Prince of Egypt".

Houston released albums "My Love Is Your Love", "Just Whitney...", and "I Look to You" in 1998, 2002, and 2009, respectively. She also appeared in the film "Sparkle" alongside singer Jordin Sparks.

Whitney Houston has earned six Grammy Awards and seven number-one songs in a row on the "Billboard" Hot 100. She had a total of 11 "Billboard" Hot 100 number-ones, placing her in fourth place for women behind Mariah Carey (18 number-ones), Rihanna (13), and Madonna and The Supremes (12 each). She is the most-awarded female artist of all time.

Houston married Bobby Brown in 1992. In 1993, they had a daughter, Bobbi Kristina Brown. In a 2009 interview, Houston indicated the marriage was both passionate and turbulent. Their marital relationship was marred by drug use and by Brown's professional jealousy, psychological abuse, and physical confrontations. The couple divorced in 2007.

On the night of February 11, 2012, at the age of 48, Houston was found dead in her guest room at The Beverly Hilton in Beverly Hills, California. The official coroner's report stated that she had accidentally drowned in the bath. Atherosclerotic heart disease and cocaine use were listed as contributing factors. Her funeral was televised.



