Fullmetal Alchemist

Fullmetal Alchemist (in "") is a popular manga and anime series created by Hiromu Arakawa and serialized in Enix's (now Square Enix) "Monthly Shonen Gangan". The manga has been made into two different anime shows, one in 2003 which follows its own story, and a 2009 show which follows the story of the manga. A film, "The Conqueror of Shamballa" was created for the 2003 show, and "The Sacred Star of Milos" was created for the 2012 show.

The plot focuses on a world where alchemy is a main form of science. It tells the story of Edward and Alphonse Elric, two young alchemists, who try to bring their mother back from the dead. However, it fails miserably, and the two brothers are badly hurt. The younger brother, Alphonse Elric, loses his entire body except for his soul. The older brother, Edward Elric, gives up his arm and leg during the alchemy in order to bind Alphonse's soul to a suit of armour. Luckily, a good friend of theirs, Winry, along with her grandmother Pinako, are able to build Edward two metal limbs to help him along the way. The brothers burn down their home, with the memories inside it, and begin searching for a way to get their bodies back again. They look for the Philosopher's Stone, as that is the only thing that can defy the law of Equivalent Exchange. The boys have many adventures on the way, often coming close to death.

"Fullmetal Alchemist" has become one of the most critically acclaimed franchises in Japanese manga and anime.

Edward Elric: The main protagonist in Fullmetal Alchemist. He is brave and proud, the only thing getting him along is the promise he made to his younger brother, Alphonse, that he will get him his body back, and himself his limbs. He is shorter than the average teen and hates it when someone comments on his height, mostly getting frustrated or hurting them with his metal fist - even his brother gets the same punishment. 

Alphonse Elric: Edward Elric's younger brother of 14, Alphonse is a soul attached to an empty suit of armour as when he was little, his mother died. Both he and his brother did a forbidden form of alchemy, trying to bring back their mother after her death. The deal was his body for hers, though what happened once the transmutation had finished showed it didn't work. In order to bring back his brother, Edward did his own transmutation, giving away his arm for Alphonse. Alphonse was then placed into the armour and now their journey takes them to try to find the Philosopher's Stone, the only thing that can defy the rule of equivalent exchange, to give back Alphonse's body and Edward's limbs.


