2024 Summer Olympics

The 2024 Summer Olympics, which will be officially known as the Games of the XXXIII Olympiad, is an international athletic event that will be organized by the International Olympic Committee. The winning bid should be announced the September 11, 2017.




Roilo Golez has recommended Manila and Cebu to bid for the 2024 Summer Olympics.


Thomas Bach stated that Hamburg will apply for 2024 Olympic Games. Hamburg would host the games the first time in history and would therefore receive the virtue over Berlin as Berlin's inhabitant have a negative atmosphere towards the Olympic Games application.

The organization of the Games in Copenhagen is being investigated by the Danish government 




Larry Needle, executive director of the Philadelphia Sports Congress, said that if Philadelphia, the largest city in Pennsylvania, wants to host the Olympics, its earliest realistic chance would be the 2024 Summer Games

A study by eleven graduate students from the University of Pennsylvania showed that Philadelphia should consider bidding for the 2024 Olympics. The study said that one of the city's biggest challenges would be convincing the voters who select the host city that Philadelphia is a "world-class city", something that "will require strategic changes in the city’s landscape in conjunction with a persuasive marketing strategy". The study mentions that when arriving in the city from Philadelphia International Airport, it is difficult to find a route that does not have abandoned oil tanks, old structures and thousands of tons of waste. One good thing about having the Games in Philadelphia is that it is near many large cities.


On July 10, 2007 it was revealed that the Canadian Olympic Committee has begun working on a potential bid for the 2020 or 2024 games for Toronto, the capital of Ontario and the largest city in Canada. This would be Toronto's third bid for the summer Olympic games, after unsuccessful bids for the 1996 and 2008 Summer Games.


The subtropical city of Brisbane would seriously consider bidding for the Olympic Games in 2020 or 2024, former Queensland Premier Peter Beattie has said. His announcement came after IOC President Jacques Rogge said the IOC would love to see a bid from Brisbane in the future.

Australia hosted the 1956 Olympic Games in Melbourne. In 1986, Brisbane lost the bid for the 1992 Summer Olympics, which were held in Barcelona. However, Brisbane has experience in hosting major international sporting events; the city hosted the 1982 Commonwealth Games and the 2001 Goodwill Games.

Australia also hosted the Olympic games in Sydney, 2000.


