Nintendo

Nintendo (In Japanese: 任天堂) is a company that makes video games and video game consoles. At first, it began by creating playing cards and other toys and games. Their main office is in Kyoto, Japan. They also have offices in other continents.

Nintendo was formed on September 23, 1889. They originally were a company that made playing cards. Then it went on to making toys, but in the 1960s, they started doing other things, such as owning hotels. They began making video games only in the 1970s. In 1980, they came out with a hand-held game device called Game and Watch. Nintendo's first video game console was the Color TV Game. Famicom, Nintendo's second console, was first only released in Japan but it was later released in some other areas, such as North America and Europe. When they released it in there, its name was changed to "Nintendo Entertainment System", or NES for short. They also released some popular stand-alone video games, with names like the arcade game "Donkey Kong", and NES games "Super Mario Bros.", "Duck Hunt", and "The Legend of Zelda". Later, the company made hand-helds such as the Game Boy and DS, and consoles such as Nintendo 64, GameCube, Wii, and WiiU.


Today, Nintendo has many popular characters and series. "Mario", and "The Legend of Zelda" are examples of these. 

Nintendo currently sells the 3DS, Wii, Wii U and Nintendo DS video game consoles. The Wii plugs into a TV and is called a "home console", because it is used most of the time at home. The Nintendo DS is small and has its own screens. It is called "portable" and "handheld", because it is played on using hands, and can be taken anywhere. The 3DS is like the DS, but it has a switch that can make one of the screens show things in 3D plus a higher horse power.

In March 2011 of February 26 2012, Nintendo released their new handheld system in Japan and Europe, the Nintendo 3DS. It is the first system to have 3D without special 3D glasses. On the date of July 28 2012, Nintendo released a bigger update called the 3DS XL, which has a new anti-glare screen, a top screen that is 90% bigger than the old 3DS and has a matte plastic finish instead of a glossy metal one. This means that scratches and fingerprints cannot be seen as easily, but it can be broken more easily and it is not as durable.

Other video game companies:



