Jura (department)

Jura is a department in the east of France in the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region. It is named after the Jura mountains.

The largest city in the department is Dole but its prefecture (capital) is the city of Lons-le-Saunier.

Historically, Jura belonged to the Free County of Burgundy, known in French as the Franche-Comté. Dole was the capital until the region was conquered by Louis XIV. Louis XIV moved the capital to Besançon and Dole is now a "sous-préfecture" of Jura.

As early as the 13th century, inhabitants of the southern 2/3 of Jura spoke a dialect of Arpitan language. It continued to be spoken in rural areas into the 20th century.

Jura is one of the original 83 departments created during the French Revolution on March 4, 1790. It was created from part of the former province of Free County. The department was created with six districts: Dole, Lons-le-Saunier, Orgelet, Poligny, Saint-Claude and Salins; the capital was Lons-le-Saunier alternating with Dole, Poligny and Salins but from 1794 only Lons-le-Saunier remained as the capital.

In 1800, with the creation of the "arrondissements" in France, the six districts were changed into four "arrondissements": Lons-le-Saunier, Dole, Poligny and Saint-Claude. On 10 September 1926, the "arrondissement" of Poligny was eliminated.

Jura is part of the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region. It has an area of .

The department borders with 5 departments in two regions. The Swiss canton of Vaud is to the southeast.


The highest point in the department is Crêt Pela (), high; it is also the highest mountain of the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region. The "Crêt Pela" mountain is in the "Forêt du Massacre", Jura mountain range.

Many lakes can be found throughout the Jura department. The largest natural lake in the department is the Lac De Chalain. It is long and wide. Lac de Vouglans was formed after the building of a hydro-electric dam; it is one of the largest man-made lakes in France.

The Ain river starts in the Jura department but it is the main river of the Ain department. The Doubs also flows through a part of the department. Many tributaries of both rivers flow, partially or completely, in the Jura department.

The climate of the Jura varies greatly by elevation. The lower valleys are temperate and pleasant, but the high mountain valleys have bitterly cold winters.

Jura is managed by the "Departmental Council of Jura" in Lons-le-Saunier. The department is part of the Bourgogne-Franche-Comté region.

There are 3 "arrondissements" (districts), 17 "cantons" and 509 "communes" (municipalities) in Jura.

The following is a list of the 17 cantons of the Jura department (with their INSEE codes), following the French canton reorganisation which came into effect in March 2015:
Jura had a population, in 2014, of 260,681, for a population density of inhabitants/km. The "arrondissement" of Lons-le-Saunier, with 126,071 inhabitants, is the "arrondissement" with more inhabitants.
Evolution of the population in Jura

The cities with more than inhabitants in the department are:

Jura is a wine-growing region. The Jura wines are very distinctive and unusual wines, such as vin jaune, which is made by a similar process to sherry. It develops under a flor of yeast. This is made from the local Savagnin grape variety. Other grape varieties include Poulsard, Trousseau, and Chardonnay.

The Jura mountains provide ample opportunities for hiking, skiing, mountain biking and other winter sports.




