List of Melbourne railway stations

This is a list of the 200 currently operating suburban railway stations (216 including greater metropolitan stations) in Melbourne, Australia. The stations make up 16 railway lines going out from the city (and 4 greater metropolitan lines), as well as the central City Loop.

There are also a further 19 stations on 3 old, volunteer-operated, tourist railways. These are not a part of the suburban network.

Stations are broken up into 2 Myki ticketing zones (some stations are included in both zones, where tickets for either zone may be used), as well as the City Saver area, which is within Zone 1 and covers the central business district. On March 4, 2007 zone 3 was made part of zone 2.





For detailed travel information, do not rely only on this page; please go to the Metlink website.


56 stations

Separates from the Pakenham line at Caulfield station.

19 stations


The Stony Point line is a greater metropolitan line that joins the Frankston line.

Separates from the Sandringham line at South Yarra station.

23 stations


The Traralgon line is a regional line that continues the Pakenham line.

Separates from the Pakenham line at Dandenong station.


Separates from the Eastern lines (Burnley group) at Richmond station.

12 stations


53 stations

Separates from the City Loop at Southern Cross and Flagstaff stations.

14 stations


Separates from the Craigieburn railway line at North Melbourne station.

13 stations


Separates from the Craigieburn railway line at North Melbourne station.

12 stations


The Sunbury line is a greater metropolitan line that joins the Sydenham line.

Separates from the Sydenham line at Footscray station.

7 stations


Separates from the Williamstown line at Newport station.

7 stations


The Geelong and Warrnambool regional lines join the Werribee line.

Separates from the Craigieburn railway line at Newmarket station. Trains may start running on this line every day, as part of renewing the Royal Melbourne Showgrounds.


49 stations

Separates from the City Loop at Flinders Street and Parliament stations.

23 stations


Separates from the Lilydale line at Burnley station.

12 stations


Separates from the Lilydale line at Ringwood station.

8 stations


Separates from the Lilydale line at Camberwell station.

6 stations


37 stations

Separates from the City Loop at Flinders Street and Parliament stations.

23 stations


Separates from the Hurstbridge line at Clifton Hill station.

14 stations


These lines have trains pulled by diesel engines and railcar services, and use Myki tickets. All trains are run by V/Line, except for the Stony Point line run by Metro Trains Melbourne using engines borrowed from V/Line Passenger.

15 stations

Begins at Frankston station on the Frankston line.

9 stations


Separates from the Sydenham line at Sunshine station.


The Ballarat regional line is joined to the Melton line.

Continues from the Sydenham line.


The Bendigo regional line is joined to the Sunbury line.

These lines are run part-time (full-time in the case of Puffing Billy) by groups of people who want to keep old trains running, and are do not use Myki tickets.

19 stations

12 stations. In this list only, a star ( * ) shows stations at which trains do not normally stop, and are there mainly to be historic.







