Albert, Prince Consort

Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Francis Albert Augustus Charles Emmanuel; later The Prince Consort; 26 August 1819 – 14 December 1861) was the husband of Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.

Albert was born near Coburg, in Germany. He was the son of Ernest I, the Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, and Louise of Saxe-Gotha-Anhalt. He was a clever child, and liked science, reading and mathematics.

He married Queen Victoria, his first cousin, on 10 February 1840. The wedding was held at St. James's Palace, the queen's official home in London. Both Victoria and Albert were deeply in love with each other. However, the queen kept Albert out of politics; he was not allowed to take part in the government of the country. In the end, this changed, and Albert often gave advice to the Prime Minister of the time.

Albert and Victoria had nine children together. Albert's favourite child was his first, Victoria, who became Queen of Prussia and Empress of Germany, in 1871. When his second child, Albert Edward (the future king Edward VII) was born in 1841, he took an active interest in his education. The two were never close, and Albert often overworked his elder son. 

Albert came up with the idea of the Great Exhibition at Hyde Park, in London. The exhibition was meant to show Britain's industrial strength, following the Industrial Revolution. It was a great success, and improved his popularity in England. It was held in the Crystal Palace, a huge glass building, which burnt down in 1936, long after it had been moved from Hyde Park and rebuilt in a part of south London which got called Crystal Palace. 

Albert's health got worse as he got older. In 1861, he caught a fever, whilst travelling to Cambridge to see his son. The fever turned into typhoid, a disease which was common in the 19th century. He died at Windsor Castle, on the 14 December 1861. Queen Victoria was very upset, and she spent the next forty years of her reign in mourning for her dead husband.

Prince Albert is still remembered today, over 150 years after he died. For example:
Several foods were named after Albert, including:



