Taylor Swift

Taylor Alison Swift (born December 13, 1989) is an American country pop singer-songwriter. She has won ten Grammy Awards as of February 2016.

She had her first hit, "Tim McGraw", in 2006 at the age of 16 which was also her debut single. In 2008, she sold more albums than anyone else that year. 

She won Country Music Television's (CMT) "Breakthrough Video of the Year" award in 2007 for "Tim McGraw". She was also nominated by the Academy of Country Music for "Top New Female Vocalist".

The lead single from Swift's fourth album "Red", "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together", became Swift's first number-one song on the US "Billboard" Hot 100. The single "I Knew You Were Trouble" reached number two on the chart while becoming her first chart-topper on "Billboard"'s Mainstream Top 40/Pop Songs chart. In 2013, "Red" was nominated for Best Country Album and Album of the Year at the Grammy Awards.

Swift performed "Shake It Off", the lead single from her fifth album, "1989", at the 2014 MTV VMAs. "1989" was released in October 27, 2014. The singles "Shake It Off", "Blank Space", and "Bad Blood" all reached number one on the "Billboard" Hot 100. These singles, along with "Style" and "Wildest Dreams", have also topped the Mainstream Top 40/Pop Songs chart.

Her most recent single, "I Don't Wanna Live Forever", was recorded with English singer Zayn Malik (formerly of One Direction). It was released as a single for the soundtrack of the film "Fifty Shades Darker" (2017). It reached number two on the Hot 100 in the US.

On June 8, 2017, Swift restored her music on streaming sites such as Spotify and Apple Music after previously removing it from being streamed. This move was seen by critics as a move in her alleged rivalry against singer Katy Perry, whose album was released the next day.

Swift was born in Reading, Pennsylvania, to Scott and Andrea Swift, and was raised in Wyomissing, Pennsylvania on a Christmas tree farm. 

Swift has two cats, both of the Scottish Fold breed. One is named "Meredith Grey" after the doctor on "Grey's Anatomy". The second is named "Olivia Benson" after the detective, now Sargent on "".

She is of Irish, Italian, French and German ancestry.





