Nickel Creek

Nickel Creek was an American acoustic musical group. Although the group's music has roots in bluegrass, Nickel Creek now calls itself "progressive acoustic". The band has three people: Chris Thile (mandolin), Sean Watkins (guitar), and Sara Watkins (violin). A fourth member also plays bass with the band. Chris Thile's father Scott Thile, Byron House, and Derek Jones have played bass with the group. Mark Schatz has played bass with Nickel Creek since 2003. The band has played songs by Radiohead, Elliott Smith, Bob Dylan, and even "Toxic" by Britney Spears. However, most of the songs the band play are originals.

The band started in California in 1989 with Scott Thile, Chris' father, playing the double bass. The oldest of the children, Sean Watkins, was only twelve years old at the time. In the early days, Nickel Creek made two albums: "Little Cowpoke" in 1993, and "Here to There" in 1997. 

Alison Krauss produced the album "Nickel Creek", which came out in 2000 on Sugar Hill Records. It was awarded a gold certification in 2002 by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). Nickel Creek got two Grammy Award nominations for the album: Best Bluegrass Album and Best Country Instrumental for "Ode to a Butterfly". Three singles, "When You Come Back Down", "The Lighthouse's Tale", and "Reasons Why" were released with music videos, and the first two were on the US Country chart. The album itself topped the Billboard Heatseekers chart, and reached number 125 on the "Billboard" 200.

To help sell the album, Nickel Creek toured with artists like Lyle Lovett, Dolly Parton, Vince Gill, and Amy Grant.

In 2002, "This Side" came out and it was also produced by Alison Krauss. It reached number 18 on the "Billboard" 200, and was also made gold by the RIAA. "This Side" was different from the first album by adding more pop and rock. Chris Thile described the album in 2002: 

On the "This Side" tour of 2002 and 2003, Nickel Creek played shows as the main act for the most part, but also opened five shows for John Mayer in November 2002 in Upstate New York and New England, and played with Gillian Welch and David Rawlings earlier in the year. In 2003, Nickel Creek was on Béla Fleck's album "Little Worlds".

Nickel Creek also released three singles from "This Side": "This Side", "Speak", and "Smoothie Song". "This Side" appeared on the US Country chart, but the others did not chart with Billboard. However, "Smoothie Song" topped the AAA Contemporary chart for three weeks.

Nickel Creek released "Why Should the Fire Die?" in August 2005. The album brought even more rock and pop to Nickel Creek's sound, just as "This Side" did. Chris Thile talked about the band's genre and style in a 2005 interview from "JamBase": "We actually feel like more than a bluegrass band that stretched out. We are a band that incorporates bluegrass into our music. There's been a problem in perception. 'Bluegrass band leaves the fold' (uses a news announcer voice). No, no, no, no, no. Actually, it's a band that incorporates a little bluegrass into whatever the hell kind of music they play." Sean Watkins also said: 

On August 28, 2006, Nickel Creek announced on their website that they would not be together as a band anymore. The message was:
After the break was announced, a tour was scheduled. To say goodbye to their fans, the tour was named the "Farewell (For Now)" Tour, because the band does not know if they will get together again. The tour started in April 2007 and ended in November 2007 in Nashville, Tennessee. The tour had many guest appearances by musicians like Fiona Apple, Glen Phillips, Jon Brion, Bruce Molsky, Béla Fleck, and Tift Merritt.

When talking about Nickel Creek's last tour before the break, Sara Watkins said "A lot of the other stuff will be special in the way that anything is special when you realize that it’s not going to be around forever... Nothing is going be Nickel Creek except Nickel Creek. I’m not looking for anything to top this. It can’t be duplicated in my life."





