Scream 2

Scream 2 is a 1997 American horror movie directed by Wes Craven and written by Kevin Williamson. Neve Campbell, Jamie Kennedy, Courteney Cox, David Arquette, and Liev Schrieber all repeated their roles from the first movie with the supporting cast including Sarah Michelle Geller and Laurie Metcalf. The movie was released by Dimension Films on December 12, 1997. It is a sequel to "Scream" and is followed by "Scream 3".

Two years after the events of Woodsboro, Sidney Prescott and Randy Meeks have enrolled at Windsor College trying to move on with the lives. Gale Weathers has written a bestselling book based on the events of Scream entitled The Woodsboro Murders which in turn has been turned into a movie called Stab. Dewey Riley remained in Woodsboro where he continued to work as a police officer.

At the premiere of Stab, two Windsor College seniors, Maureen Evans and Phil Stevens, were brutally murdered. Now the Scream survivors and the new characters band together to try to decide if it is happening again. Following the murder of the next victim, CiCi Cooper, they realize someone is trying to make a sequel.

As if her life was not complicated enough, Cotton Weary, who was released after Billy and Stu were killed, has suddenly showed back up into her life. Eventually a list of suspects is beginning to be made including Cotton Weary and eventually Derek Feldman (Sidney's boyfriend) after he shows up immediately after Sidney's first attack in a sorority house.

Shortly later, Randy Meeks, a survivor of Scream, is murdered in a van. The police decide to put Sidney in hiding. Her roommate, Hallie, goes with her. Meanwhile, the killer attacks Gale and Dewey. Gale is safe in hiding, but the killer stabs Dewey several times.

While at a red light on a deserted street, the killer shows up and quickly kills one of the officers by slashing his throat. The killer than jumps into the car and runs over the other officer after he gets out of the car and is killed when the killer drives into a pile of poles and one of them goes through his head. Sidney and Hallie are trapped, but are lucky when they see the killer is unconscious. They manage to escape and start to run, but Sidney stops when she realizes she can find out who the killer is. She runs back, but when she gets there she sees the killer is gone. She turns around and warns Hallie, and then the killer jumps out from behind a building, grabs Hallie, and stabs her to death. Sidney takes off running.

Meanwhile, Gale leaves her hiding place and bumps into Cotton – who has blood all over his hands. He tries to tell Gale he found Dewey and was trying to help him, but Gale does not believe it and runs where she calls the police after stealing the phone from Debbie Salt, another reporter.

In the meantime, Sidney runs into the theater where she hears music playing. She sees no one there and tries to leave, but the set comes down and locks her in. That is when a cross falls and Derek is tied to it, gagged. She wakes him up and tries to get him down, but the killer shows up and reveals himself – Mickey! He manages to trick Sidney into thinking Derek is the other killer. Then, Mickey shoots and kills Derek.


