2006 Pacific hurricane season

The 2006 Pacific hurricane season was an event in the annual cycle of tropical cyclone formation. It officially began May 15, 2006 in the eastern Pacific, designated as the area east of 140°W, and began on June 1 2006 in the central Pacific, which is between the International Date Line and 140°W. Both seasons officially ended on November 30, 2006. These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the eastern Pacific basin.

On May 27 Tropical Depression One-E formed. It became Tropical Storm Aletta later on. Aletta stalled offshore Mexico causing minor damage. Tropical Storm Aletta weakened to a tropical depression and died on May 30.

Two-E formed off shore Mexico on June 3. It died 2 days later. Two-E produced 15 inches of rain in Mexico before it died.
Bud was a Category 3 storm. It rapidly strengthened and then weakened just as fast.
Carlota caused light rain in Mexico but no damage was reported. It was a Category 1 storm.
Daniel was a long lived Major hurricane that Affected Hawaii with some rain. It peaked as a Category 4. It was the second strongest storm this year.
It caused some rain in Mexico, causing minor damage.

Fabio caused heavy rainfall in Hawaii.

Gilma produced light rain in Mexico. It was also the weakest storm so far.
Hector was a Category 2 hurricane. It made it to the Central Pacific.
Ioke was the strongest hurricane ever in the Central Pacific that threated the Johnson Atoll and Wake Island. It formed on august 20. Ioke rapidly became a major hurricane 36 hours later. Ioke went extratropical on September 6. Damage was nearly $100 million. Ioke was retired at the end of the year. It also caused heavy rain in Alaska. Ioke is the most intense storm ever in the central Pacific and the only Category 5 storm that formed in the basin.

Illena killed one person in Mexico. It peaked as a Cateogory 3 storm.

John started as Tropical Depression Eleven-E and later on became a tropical storm and then a hurricane. The hurricane peaked as a Category 4. John killed 5 when it hit Baja California as a Category 2 storm on September 1. Hurricane John died on September 4.

Kristy was a Category 1 hurricane that was outflowed by Hurricane John.
Lane caused severe damage in Mexico, when it hit there as a Category 3 major hurricane. Lane killed 4 people and left $203 million in damage.

Three-C was a short lived tropical depression that started several hundred miles southwest of Hawaii. It died the next day while no where near any land.
Norman struck Mexico as a tropical depression, causing minor damage.

Olivia did not affect land.

Four-C was a short lived tropical depression. It formed on October 13 and died the next day. The remaims of Four-C caused heavy rain in Hawaii.

Paul was a Cateogory 2 hurricane that killed 4 in Mexico.

Rosa produced light rain to Mexico in November.

Tropical Depression Twenty-E formed and died on the same day, November 11. Twenty-E did not affect any land.
Sergio was also a Cateogory 2 storm. It was also the strongest November storm.



