Hot Club de Paris

Hot Club de Paris are a band which came from Liverpool, United Kingdom. They are signed to the London-based Moshi Moshi Records, a record company, and released their debut album "Drop It 'Til It Pops" in October 2006. Their second album, "Live at Dead Lake", was released in June 2008.

The band formed in early 2004 after band members Matthew and Paul met in 2003 working at Chester racecourse. It's other members were playing in different bands in the Liverpool music scene including street punkers Down and Outs and new wave popsters Victor FME. 

They both loved American punk rock bands (Minutemen, Firehose, SST Records bands etc.) and they became interested in math rock and experimental indie bands which influenced their music a lot. They signed to Moshi Moshi Records in 2005, and have since toured around the world to support the release of their debut record. 

They have been shown on a number of music-based TV shows in the UK and their record played airplay on a number of radio stations including BBC Radio1, BBC 6 Music and XFM, whose DJ John Kennedy has championed the band. Kennedy claimed that their debut album is 'one of the best of 2006'.

They have toured with a number of bands including Jamie T, Maxïmo Park and The Who. 

They played at the 2007 SXSW music festival in Austin, Texas and have toured in the UK, Italy, Belgium, Ireland, Spain, France, Sweden, Iceland, Germany, Switzerland, the United States, Holland and India.

They recorded their second album ("Live at Dead Lake") in Chicago with Brian Deck. Brian Deck has previously produced Iron and Wine and Modest Mouse. It was released in 2008.

They released two EPs in 2010: "With Days Like This As Cheap As Chewing Gum, Why Would Anyone Want To Work?" and "The Rise And Inevitable Fall Of The High School Suicide Cluster Band". Tracks from these EPs were released on the album "Free The Pterodactyl Three" in 2011.


Hot Club De Paris have released several tracks on compilation albums, including "Can You Hear Me Clearly?", on Moshi Moshi records, and a rare CDR release "Munkyfest v7.0", released by the organisers of the "Munkyfest" festival. 




