Tom Clancy

Thomas Leo "Tom" Clancy Jr. (April 12, 1947 - October 1, 2013) was an American writer and screenwriter. His books are thrillers about politics, spys and the military. Most of his books include many technical details about their subjects. Seventeen of his novels were best-sellers, with over 100 million copies in print. His stories take place during and after the Cold War. He owned with some other people a Major League Baseball team. Clancy also produced popular video games.

Thomas Leo Clancy Jr. was born on April 12, 1947, in Maryland. He finished school 1965. After school he studied English Literature at Loyola College in Baltimore and finished that in 1968. He said he studied English because he was not smart enough to do physics.

Clancy married his first wife, Wanda, in the 1970s. They have four children together and separated in 1998.

In 1993, Clancy bought with some other people the Baltimore Orioles (Baseball team) from Eli Jacobs.

In 1999, Clancy, at age 52, married the 32-year-old writer Alexandra Marie Llewellyn, on June 26. Llewellyn is a distant relative of Colin Powell.

Clancy is known to have been politically conservative, and gave over $200,000 to Republican Party politicians.

Clancy died October 1, 2013, after a brief illness at Johns Hopkins Hospital, near his Baltimore home. No cause of death was released. Clancy is survived by his wife, Alexandra; their daughter, Alexis; and four children from a previous marriage to Wanda King: Michelle Bandy, Christine Blocksidge, Kathleen Clancy and Thomas Clancy III. His cause of death was later confirmed to be heart failure.

From the books "The Hunt for Red October", "Patriot Games", "Clear and Present Danger", and "The Sum of All Fears" films were made, that many people wanted to see. The first NetForce book was filmed for television.

The website IMDB says that Tom Clancy's novel "Without Remorse" is to be made into a movie in 2008. No other details are available (27 June 2007).

Several books that are written by other writers have Tom Clancy's name on them, because the books are written in the same way and have the same stories as his own. These are:

Only two books of Clancy are not with Jack Ryan and/or John Clark.




