Ceasefire

A ceasefire (or truce) is a stoppage of a war or any armed conflict, where each side of the conflict agrees with the other to stop aggressive actions for some time. Ceasefires may be declared as part of a formal treaty, but they have also been called part of an informal understanding between opposing forces.

On December 24, 1914, during World War I, there was an unofficial ceasefire as both the Germans and the British sought to observe Christmas (the "Christmas Truce"). There was no treaty signed, and after a few days the war resumed.

A ceasefire was reached on July 27, 1953 to halt the conflict of the Korean War and establish a demilitarized zone. But no peace treaty has been signed. Therefore, officially North and South Korea are still at war.

Pakistan's government has repeatedly claimed that the Republic of India is violating the Simla Agreement by constructing a fence along the cesefire line in the Kashmir Conflict. However, the Government of India maintains the fence has decreased armed infiltration into Indian-administered Kashmir.

Then-Pakistani President and ex-Army Chief of Army Staff (Pakistan) Pervez Musharraf promised in 2002 to curb infiltration into the Territorial dispute. After the November 2003 ceasefire line agreement, building resumed and was completed in late 2004. LoC fencing was completed in Kashmir Valley and Jammu region on 30 September 2004. According to Indian Military sources, the fence has reduced by 80% the numbers of militants who routinely cross into the occupied territory of the disputed state to attack Indian soldiers.

Another example of a ceasefire in the Israeli–Palestinian conflict was announced between the State of Israel and the Palestinian National Authority on February 8, 2005. When announced, chief Palestinian negotiator Saeb Erekat publicly defined the ceasefire as follows: "We have agreed that today President Mahmoud Abbas will declare a full cessation of violence against Israelis anywhere and Prime Minister Ariel Sharon will declare a full cessation of violence and military activities against Palestinians anywhere."



