Calvin Harris

Calvin Harris (born Adam Richard Wiles, 17 January 1984) is a Scottish singer, songwriter, DJ, and record producer. He was born to English parents. He grew up in Dumfries, Scotland. Harris was paid more than any other DJ in 2013.

Calvin Harris signed record contracts with EMI (publishing) and Sony BMG (recording) in 2006, after his music was found on the social networking website, MySpace. 

His first album "I Created Disco" was released on 18 June 2007. The album contained uptempo electronic sounding songs that were influenced by music from the 1980s. To promote "I Created Disco", Harris left to go on a tour of the UK, supporting Faithless and Groove Armada. "I Created Disco" featured the single "Acceptable in the 80s", a tribute to the style and culture of the decade. The song reached the top ten on the UK singles chart, remaining on the chart for fifteen weeks. "The Girls" was the album's second charted single. Harris' second single reached number three in the UK Singles Chart. Another single from the album was "Merrymaking at My Place"; however, it only reached #43 in the UK chart.

On 23 January 2009, Pete Tong played Harris' single "I'm Not Alone" on BBC Radio 1. 

"Ready for the Weekend", Harris' second album, was released 14 August 2009. It went straight to number one in the UK Albums Chart.

In September 2011, Barbadian recording artist Rihanna released the single "We Found Love" for her sixth studio album, "Talk That Talk". The song was written and produced by Harris. The song was a worldwide success, topping record charts around the world, including those in Canada, the UK, and the US. It was named the 25th best-performing song of all time by "Billboard". 

In 2012, Harris released his third album "18 Months". Eight singles were released from it. They included "We Found Love", "Bounce" with American R&B singer Kelis, and "I Need Your Love" with English singer-songwriter Ellie Goulding.

In 2013, Harris' album "18 Months" was nominated for Best Dance/Electronica Album at the 2014 Grammy Awards.

Harris released the single "Summer" in 2014. This was followed by the album "Motion" which featured the song "Outside" with Ellie Goulding.

He released the single "How Deep Is Your Love" in 2015 with the band Disciples. In 2016, he released the single "This Is What You Came For" with Barbadian recording artist Rihanna.

In 2007, Harris also recorded with Australian entertainer Kylie Minogue. He had caught Minogue's attention after his recordings had been passed on to her by another record producer. Harris says that working with her was "surreal, but fun" although revealed to Mixmag in 2007 to "needing a few drinks before meeting her." It has been confirmed that Harris has co-written and produced two songs on the forthcoming "Kylie" album, "In My Arms" and "Heart Beat Rock".

Harris began dating British singer Rita Ora in 2013. The two ended their relationship in June 2014. He was in a relationship with Taylor Swift from March 2015 until June 2016.

On 20 May 2016, Harris was hospitalized after being involved in a car accident. He was a passenger in a Cadillac sport utility vehicle that was hit by a Volkswagen Beetle. Harris was treated for a cut on the nose and later was released. Two of his DJ sets had to be canceled.



