Federico Fellini

Federico Fellini (born 20 January 1920 in Rimini, died 31 October 1993 in Rome) was an Italian movie-maker and director. Fellini's movies combine memory, dream, and fantasy.

The first movie Fellini directed was "Lo Sceicco Bianco" (1951), with Alberto Sordi, written by Michelangelo Antonioni and Ennio Flaiano. In making this movie Fellini met Nino Rota, the musician that would follow him for the successful rest of his career.

Fellini was married to actress Giulietta Masina (1921-1994) from 1943 until his death. In 1945, he had a son who survived for only 2 weeks; it was the only child of Fellini and Giulietta Masina. Masina acted in many of his movies. Other actors Fellini often worked with include Marcello Mastroianni, Alberto Sordi, and Anita Ekberg.

Apart from making movies he also wrote scripts for radio shows, for movies (mainly for Roberto Rossellini) and wrote comic gags for well known actors like Aldo Fabrizi. Fellini also produced several drawings (mostly pencil on paper), often humoristic portraits. His first success was in drawing advertising pictures for movies.

During Fascism an "Avanguardista", his first writings were for Alleanza Cinematografica Italiana (ACI), a production company of Vittorio Mussolini, son of Benito, who introduced him to Rossellini.

In 1944, when Fascism was over, he opened a shop in Rome in which he sold these drawings. The shop was named (in English) "The Funny Face Shop", and contained works from Fellini and De Seta, Verdini, Camerini, Scarpelli, Majorana, Guasta, Giobbe, Attalo, Migneco (all writers, directors or otherwise intellectuals working for Italian cinema). In the same year started his contribution to Rossellini's Roma Città Aperta, with Aldo Fabrizi. Fellini took also part in writing another of Rossellini's movies: "Paisà". He wrote also for other directors as Alberto Lattuada, Pietro Germi and Luigi Comencini.

In 1987 he won the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award, a lifetime achievement award. In 1993, he received an Academy Award (Oscar) for his lifetime achievement.



