Walker, Texas Ranger

Walker, Texas Ranger is an action/police television series. It was created by Leslie Greif and Paul Haggis. The series stars Chuck Norris as a member of the Texas Rangers. His co-stars include Sheree J. Wilson as D.A. Alex Cahill and Clarence Gilyard as Texas Ranger Jimmy Trivette. 

The series was televised on CBS in the spring of 1993. This first season consisted of three pilot episodes. Eight full seasons followed from September 25, 1993 to May 19, 2001. It was televised in over 100 countries. A made-for-television movie "Trial By Fire" has been televised. The series airs in reruns. The entire series has been released to DVD. 

The show is known for its conservative moral values. The wholesome main characters don't use drugs, and they participate in community service. Martial arts were the primary tool of law enforcement. Occasionally Walker and company used martial arts to reach out to the community. The series has since become one of the most popular action series in television history. It has gained a cult following for its camp appeal.

The series is centered on a Dallas-Fort Worth–based member of the Texas Rangers named Cordell Walker. Walker was raised by his paternal uncle, a Native American named Ray Firewalker (Floyd Red Crow Westerman). Cordell prior to joining the Rangers served in the Marines' elite recon unit during the Vietnam War. Both Cordell and Uncle Ray share the values characteristic of Wild West sheriffs.

His partner and best friend is James "Jimmy" Trivette (Clarence Gilyard), a former Dallas Cowboys player "Go Long T" who takes a more modern approach. Walker's young partner grew up in Baltimore and used football as his ticket to college education. He was dropped from the team after he tore up his shoulder in a major game, which led to his career in the Rangers (often making references to watching the "Lone Ranger" and how C.D. Parker mentored him as a Rookie Officer). Trivette also works inside the office using computers and cellular phones to collate information of the people who have been taken into custody. Walker also works closely (and shares a mutual attraction) with Alexandra "Alex" Cahill (Sheree J. Wilson), a Tarrant County Assistant District Attorney, who on occasion puts up a frown if Walker does not obtain results in time. He also gets advice on cases from C.D. Parker (Gailard Sartain (pilot season), Noble Willingham (seasons 1–7)), a veteran Ranger (later inducted into the Texas Rangers Hall of Fame) who worked with Walker until retiring to operate a small restaurant and bar called "CD's Bar and Grill", a restaurant widely known in the series for its chili. In Season 7 two rookie Texas Rangers, Sydney Cooke (Nia Peeples) and Francis Gage (Judson Mills), are assigned under Walker and Trivette's command.


