List of current champions in WWE

WWE is a professional wrestling promotion based in Stamford, Connecticut. Title reigns are either determined by professional wrestling matches or are awarded to a wrestler, as a result of the culmination of various scripted storylines. There are five active singles championships for male wrestlers, two active championships for female wrestlers and two active tag team championships. Twelve wrestlers hold the championships. The list includes the number of times the wrestler has held the title, the date and location of the win, and a description of the winning bout. The following is correct as of 11, 2017.

At the top of WWE's championship hierarchy is the WWE Championship on SmackDown and the WWE Universal Championship on Raw. The current WWE Champion is Jinder Mahal. He won the title by defeating Randy Orton at on May 21st, 2017. The current WWE Universal Champion is Brock Lesnar who is in his first reign. He won the title by defeating Goldberg at April 2nd, 2017 at Orlando Florida at WrestleMania 33. 

There are three secondary titles in WWE, the WWE United States Championship on Smackdown and the WWE Intercontinental Championship and the WWE Cruiserweight Championship on Raw. The Intercontinental Championship is currently held by TJ Extreme, who is in his first reign. He won the title by defeating The Miz at Monday Night Raw at June 20, 2017. The United States Championship is currently held by AJ Styles in his first reign with the belt. He won it by defeating Kevin Owens at the WWE Live event on 7 july 2017. The Cruiserweight Championship is for wrestlers below the weight limit, and is currently held by Neville, who is in his first reign. After defeating Rich Swann at the on January, 29th, 2017 

There are two championships available for female wrestlers: the WWE Raw Women's Championship and the WWE SmackDown Women's Championship. The Raw Women's Championship is currently held by Alexa Bliss in her first reign. She won the title by defeating Bayley at Raw exclusive PPV Extreme Rules. The SmackDown Women's Championship is held by Naomi, in her second reign. She defeated 5 other women at WrestleMania 33 for the title.

There are two tag team championships: the WWE Raw Tag Team Championship and the WWE SmackDown Tag Team Championship. The Raw Tag Team Championship is held by Sheamus and Cesaro in their second reign (This is Cesaro's third tag team title reign as he won his first tag team title with Tyson Kidd) they won the titles by defeating The Hardy Boyz in a steel cage match at Extreme Rules. The SmackDown Tag Team Championship are currently held by The Usos in their third reign. They won the titles by defeating American Alpha at an episode of Smackdown Live.

WWE's NXT division features its own set of championships.

The top title is the NXT Championship, which is currently held by Bobby Roode , who is in his first reign. He won the title by defeating Shinsuke Nakamura at .

The NXT Women's Championship is held by Asuka, who is in her first reign. She won the title by defeating Bayley at by submission.

The NXT Tag Team Championship is held by The Authors of Pain ( and ), who are in their First reign, both as a team and individually. They won the titles by defeating #DIY at  in San Antonio, Texas on January 28, 2017.





