Oakland Raiders

The Oakland Raiders are a professional American football team in the National Football League. They play in Oakland, California, USA. Their stadium is Oakland–Alameda County Coliseum. They were created in 1960 as a new American Football League team. They play in the Western Division of the American Football Conference. Division rivals are Denver Broncos, Kansas City Chiefs, and San Diego Chargers. The Raiders have won three Super Bowls.

A few months after the AFL's first draft in 1959, owners of the Minneapolis new team (later known as the Minnesota Vikings) accepted the invitation to join the National Football League. Needing a replacement, the AFL tried to find one quickly. Oakland was thought to be an unlikely city to have a professional American football team. The AFL owners picked Oakland after Los Angeles Chargers owner Barron Hilton threatened to drop his team unless a second team was placed on the West Coast. The city of Oakland was awarded the eighth AFL team on January 30, 1960, and the team took over the Minneapolis club's draft picks. The new Oakland team was called the "Raiders", which is used as a synonym for a pirate. The team logo includes an illustration of a pirate.

In the early years, the Raiders struggled. When Al Davis came in as head coach and general manager, the Raiders got better. Davis hired John Rauch and went to the their first AFL Championship against the Houston Oilers and won it 40-7. After winning their first AFL championship they earned a shot at Super Bowl II and lost to Green Bay Packers 33-14. The next two years, the Raiders again won Western Division titles, only to lose the AFL Championship to the eventual Super Bowl winners—the New York Jets (1968) and Kansas City Chiefs (1969).

After the 1969 season, the AFL decided to merge with the NFL. The Raiders join the American Football Conference as a Western Division member. John Madden was hired as head coach. Madden took the Raiders to their first Super Bowl win against Minnesota Vikings 32-14 in Super Bowl XI. Later, Madden left for a commentary career. The Raiders hired Tom Flores, the first Hispanic head coach in NFL history. Flores took the Raiders for their second Super Bowl win against Philadelphia Eagles 27 10 in Super Bowl XV. The Raiders became the first wild card team to win a Super Bowl.

Al Davis signed a note to make the Raiders move to Los Angeles. The Raiders won their third Super Bowl against the Washington Redskins.

The Raiders move back to Oakland. Currently, the Raiders have struggle since 2003 season after losing to the Tampa Bay Buccanears in Super Bowl XXXVII.

"Note: W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties"
+ = Due to a strike-shortened season in 1982, all teams were ranked by conference instead of division.



