List of tallest buildings in the world

This list of tallest buildings in the world ranks skyscrapers by height. Only buildings with continuously occupiable floors are included, thus non-building structures, including towers, are not included. (See List of tallest buildings and structures.)

As of 2016, this list includes all 135 buildings (completed and architecturally topped out) which reach a height of 300 metres (984 ft) or more as assessed by their highest architectural feature. Seven of the last eight buildings to have held the record as 'tallest building' are still found in the list, with the exception being the North Tower of the original World Trade Center after its destruction in the September 11 attacks of 2001.

The countries with three or more entries in the above list of 135 buildings are:

The count for China includes six in Hong Kong and, with the exception of a dozen buildings, all are relatively new, having been completed in and after 2010. Worldwide, as there are plans in the next five years for more than 80 buildings in the same height range (including about 40 in China), then the list should have a total of about 200 buildings by the year 2020.

This measurement disregards distinctions between architectural and non-architectural extensions, and simply measures to the highest point. This measurement is useful for air traffic obstacle determinations, and is also a wholly objective measure. However, this measurement includes extensions that are easily added, removed, and modified from a building and are independent of the overall structure.

This measurement only recently came into use, when the Petronas Towers passed the Sears Tower (now called Willis Tower) in height. The former was considered taller because its spires were considered architectural, while the latter's antennae were not. This led to the split of definitions, with the Sears Tower claiming the lead in this and the height-to-roof (now highest occupied floor) categories, and with the Petronas claiming the lead in the architectural height category.



