Ibadi

Al-Ibādhiyyah (Arabic الاباضية) is a denomination of Islam. It is the dominant form of Islam in only one Muslim country, Oman. There are also Ibadis in Algeria as well as Libya. It is probably one of the earliest schools, founded less than 50 years after the death of the prophet Muhammad. The branch developed out of the seventh-century Islamic sect known as the Khawarij or Kharijites. Some Ibadis however do not consider themselves to be Kharijite. Some Ibadi doctrines permit an individual interpretation of hadiths, by stressing the use of common sense.

The name is from ˤAbdullāh ibn-Ibāḍ at-Tamīmī. Some followers of this branch, however, claim its true founder was Jabir ibn Zaid al-'Azdi from Nizwa, Oman.

Ibāḍī communities are generally seen as conservative. Ibāḍiyyah rejects the practice of "qunūt" or supplications while standing in prayer. Sunni Muslims traditionally think the Ibāḍiyyah are a Kharijite group. Modern-day Ibāḍīs think other Muslims are not "kuffar" "unbelievers" (as most Kharijite groups did), but as "kuffar an-niˤma" "those who deny God's grace". Today, this attitude has changed a lot. They believe that the attitude of a true believer to others is expressed in three religious obligations:

Unlike the Kharijites, Ibāḍī have abandoned the practice of assassination of mainstream Muslims.

Ibāḍīs agree with Sunnis in approving of Abū Bakr and Umar ibn al-Khattab, whom they regard as the two rightly-guided Caliphs. They think Uthman ibn Affan has introduced "bidˤa" "innovations" into Islām. They approve of the revolt which overthrew him. They also approve of the first part of ˤAlī's caliphate, and, like Shi'as, disapprove of ˤĀ'isha's rebellion against him and also disapprove of Muˤāwiyya's revolt. However, they regard ˤAlī's acceptance of arbitration at the Battle of Siffin against Muˤāwiyya's rebels as un-Islamic and as rendering him unfit for the Imamate, and they condemn ˤAlī for killing the early Kharijites of "an-Nahr" in the Battle of Nahrawan.

Ibadis also have several doctrinal differences with orthodox Islam, chief among them:





In their belief, the fifth legitimate Caliph was Abdullah ibn Wahb al-Rasibi. All Caliphs from Muˤāwiyya onwards are regarded as tyrants except Umar ibn Abdul Aziz, on whom opinions differ. However, various later Ibāḍī leaders are recognized as true imāms, including Abdullah ibn Yahya al-Kindi of South Arabia and the imāms of the Rustamid dynasty in North Africa.

Ibāḍī Muslims are also found in Jabal Nafusa in Libya, Mzab in Algeria, East Africa (particularly Zanzibar) and Djerba Island in Tunisia. The early medieval Rustamid dynasty in Algeria was Ibāḍī, and refugees from its capital Tahert founded the North African Ibāḍī communities which exist today.



