Super Smash Bros. (series)

Super Smash Bros., also known as SSB or Smash Bros., is a series of fighting video games made by Nintendo. There are four games in the series. Most of the characters are from other Nintendo games. In "Super Smash Bros. Brawl", there are two characters that are not from Nintendo.

"Super Smash Bros." started in 1999, when "Super Smash Bros." was released for the Nintendo 64. In 2001, "Super Smash Bros. Melee" was made for the Nintendo GameCube. The third game, "Super Smash Bros. Brawl", came out in stores in 2008 for the Nintendo Wii. "Brawl" came out on July 26, 2008 in Australia and it came out in Europe the day after. It came out in North America on March 9, 2008. "Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U" will come out for the Nintendo 3DS and Wii U in 2014.

Much of the game involves fighting between different characters in Nintendo games, with the object of making fall off the map. Players can pick which characters they want. At the beginning, there are default characters, who are usually the stars of their video games. Players can get secret characters by doing some things in one-player mode, such as killing 100 monsters in a row. The secret characters are usually bad guys or sidekicks (characters who help the main characters). Here is a list of characters who have been in at least one Super Smash Brothers game:



The characters have different abilities and attacks, but are used by pushing the same buttons—A is for normal attacks (hitting), and B is for special attacks (such as hitting harder or shooting things).

One of the trademarks of "Super Smash Bros." is that items appear or fall out of the sky. Players can use these items to kill opponents. These items include bombs, peaches, baseball bats, assist trophies (which produce another character to help kill opponents), and Smash Balls (which give the character a very powerful attack).

In choosing how to play the game, one can choose the stage where it is played. Many of them are based on places in Nintendo games, such as "Mario", "Donkey Kong", "The Legend of Zelda" and "EarthBound", but others (such as the Final Destination) are new to "Super Smash Bros.".


