Kane (wrestler)

Glenn Jacobs (born April 26, 1967) is an American professional wrestler. He is currently signed to the WWE. He is better known by his ring name, Kane. He is a former holder of multiple WWE championships; having held the WWE (once), Intercontinental (twice), Hardcore (once), World Heavyweight (once), ECW (once), WWE World Tag Team (nine times), and WWE Tag Team (twice) championships. His most recent championship was an eight-month run with the WWE Tag Team Championship in 2012 and 2013 alongside Daniel Bryan. He's well known for being called "The Big Red Monster", "The Big Red Machine", and "The Devil's Favorite Demon".

Kane has worked for WWE since 1995 when he used to wrestle as Dr. Isaac Yankem DDS, Jerry Lawler's private dentist. During this time he also used to wrestle as Fake Diesel. In 1997, he became Kane and started to feud with other superstars such as Mankind, Ahmed Johnson and The Undertaker. In 1999, Kane became a face and started to team with X-Pac. The pair was together until X-Pac attacked Kane in 2000. The rivalry ended at WrestleMania 2000 where Kane beat X-Pac in a tag team match with Rikishi and Road Dogg. Kane then started feuding with Chris Jericho and he beat him twice at Armageddon and Rebellion, but lost to him at Survivor Series. Later, he teamed with The Undertaker and they faced off against teams including Edge and Christian, Rikishi and Haku, as well as Triple H and Steve Austin. Kane won his first Intercontinental title against Triple H at Judgment Day.

In late 2003, Kane unmasked himself and became heel once again feuding with Rob Van Dam, Matt Hardy, Shane McMahon and Snitsky. Later on, Kane, for the second time, turned face and teamed with The Big Show and they faced Chris Masters and Carlito at WrestleMania. In 2008, at Wrestlemania 24, The Big Red Machine, Kane, beat Chavo Guerrero for the ECW Championship. He later lost the title to Mark Henry at Night of Champions.

At the 2009 WWE Draft, Kane beat SmackDown's The Brian Kendrick to win a draft pick for Raw, and later in the night, Kane himself would be traded back to SmackDown. Later in the year, Kane had a rivalry with Chris Jericho, saying that he was the co-captain for Team SmackDown at Bragging Rights which Team SmackDown won. Kane faced Chris Jericho in a #1 Contenders match for an chance to face World Heavyweight Champion the Undertaker and Big Show in a triple threat match at Survivor Series, but lost. On the November 13th episode of SmackDown, Kane turned face after he rescued The Undertaker from "Jeri-Show". That same week, Kane also defeated Zack Ryder and Eric Escobar on ECW and SmackDown, respectively.

At the Money In The Bank PPV, Kane won the Smackdown Money In The Bank ladder match. Less than an hour later, Kane cashed in his Money in the Bank contract on Rey Mysterio, beating him after a chokeslam and a Tombstone Piledriver, becoming a three time world champion, and also making him the first person ever to have held the WWE, ECW and World Heavyweight Championships within World Wrestling Entertainment.

In 2012, he and Daniel Bryan began a storyline which involved both enrolling in an anger management class and then forming a tag team. On September 16, 2012 at Night of Champions, less than a week after their first official match as a team, they won the WWE Tag Team Championship by defeating R-Truth and Kofi Kingston. They held the belts for eight months before losing to Seth Rollins and Roman Reigns at Extreme Rules on May 19, 2013.



